4.9 Discussion Questions
===

1. What is the relationship between a use case and a quality attribute scenario? If you wanted to add quality attribute information to a use case, how would you do it?
2. Do you suppose that the set of tactics for a quality attribute is finite or infinite? Why?
3. Discuss the choice of programming language (an example of choice of technology) and its relation to architecture in general, and the design decisions in the other six categories? For instance, how can certain programming languages enable or inhibit the choice of particular coordination models?
4. We will be using the automatic teller machine as an example throughout the chapters on quality attributes. Enumerate the set of responsibilities that an automatic teller machine should support and propose an initial design to accommodate that set of responsibilities. Justify your proposal.
5. Think about the screens that your favorite automatic teller machine uses. What do those screens tell you about binding time decisions reflected in the architecture?
6. Consider the choice between synchronous and asynchronous communication (a choice in the coordination mechanism category). What quality attribute requirements might lead you to choose one over the other?
7. Consider the choice between stateful and stateless communication (a choice in the coordination mechanism category). What quality attribute requirements might lead you to choose one over the other?
8. Most peer-to-peer architecture employs late binding of the topology. What quality attributes does this promote or inhibit?
