4 Understanding Quality Attributes 理解质量属性
===

_Between stimulus and response, there is a space. In that space is our power to choose our response. In our response lies our growth and our freedom._  
— Viktor E. Frankl, Man’s Search for Meaning

As we have seen in the Architecture Influence Cycle (in Chapter 3), many factors
determine the qualities that must be provided for in a system’s architecture.
These qualities go beyond functionality, which is the basic statement of the system’s
capabilities, services, and behavior. Although functionality and other qualities
are closely related, as you will see, functionality often takes the front seat in
the development scheme. This preference is shortsighted, however. Systems are
frequently redesigned not because they are functionally deficient—the replacements
are often functionally identical—but because they are difficult to maintain,
port, or scale; or they are too slow; or they have been compromised by hackers.
In Chapter 2, we said that architecture was the first place in software creation in
which quality requirements could be addressed. It is the mapping of a system’s
functionality onto software structures that determines the architecture’s support
for qualities. In Chapters 5–11 we discuss how various qualities are supported by
architectural design decisions. In Chapter 17 we show how to integrate all of the
quality attribute decisions into a single design.

We have been using the term “quality attribute” loosely, but now it is time to
define it more carefully. A quality attribute (QA) is a measurable or testable property
of a system that is used to indicate how well the system satisfies the needs of
its stakeholders. You can think of a quality attribute as measuring the “goodness”
of a product along some dimension of interest to a stakeholder.

In this chapter our focus is on understanding the following:

* How to express the qualities we want our architecture to provide to the system or systems we are building from it
* How to achieve those qualities
* How to determine the design decisions we might make with respect to those qualities

This chapter provides the context for the discussion of specific quality attributes
in Chapters 5–11.