5.5 For Further Reading 进一步阅读
===

Patterns for availability:

* You can find patterns for fault tolerance in [Hanmer 07]. 

Tactics for availability, overall:

* A more detailed discussion of some of the availability tactics in this chapter is given in [Scott 09]. This is the source of much of the material in this chapter.
* The Internet Engineering Task Force has promulgated a number of standards supporting availability tactics. These standards include non-stop forwarding [IETF 04], ping/echo ICMPv6 [IETF 06b], echo request/response), and MPLS (LSP Ping) networks [IETF 06a].

Tactics for availability, fault detection:

* The parameter fence tactic was first used (to our knowledge) in the Control Data Series computers of the late 1960s.
* Triple modular redundancy (TMR), part of the voting tactic, was developed in the early 1960s by Lyons [Lyons 62].
* The fault detection tactic of voting is based on the fundamental contributions to automata theory by Von Neumann, who demonstrated how systems having a prescribed reliability could be built from unreliable components [Von Neumann 56].

Tactics for availability, fault recovery:

* Standards-based realizations of active redundancy exist for protecting network links (i.e., facilities) at both the physical layer [Bellcore 99, Telcordia 00] and the network/link layer [IETF 05].
* Exception handlinghas been written about by [Powel Douglass 99]. Software can then use this information to mask the fault, usually by correcting the cause of the exception and retrying the operation.
* [Morelos-Zaragoza 06] and [Schneier 96] have written about the comparison of state during resynchronization.
* Some examples of how a system can degrade through use (degradation) are given in [Nygard 07].
* [Utas 05] has written about escalating restart.
* Mountains of papers have been written about parameter typing, but [Utas 05] writes about it in the context of availability (as opposed to bug prevention, its usual context).
* Hardware engineers often use preparation-and-repair tactics. Examples include error detection and correction (EDAC) coding, forward error correction (FEC), and temporal redundancy. EDAC coding is typically used to protect control memory structures in high-availability distributed real-time embedded systems [Hamming 80]. Conversely, FEC coding is typically employed to recover from physical-layer errors occurring on external network links Morelos-Zaragoza 06]. Temporal redundancy involves sampling spatially redundant clock or data lines at time intervals that exceed the pulse width of any transient pulse to be tolerated, and then voting out any defects detected [Mavis 02].

Tactics for availability, fault prevention:

* Parnas and Madey have written about increasing an element’s competence set [Parnas 95].
* The ACID properties, important in the transactions tactic, were introduced by Gray in the 1970s and discussed in depth in [Gray 93].

Analysis:

* Fault tree analysis dates from the early 1960s, but the granddaddy of resources for it is the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission’s “Fault Tree Handbook,” published in 1981 [Vesely 81]. NASA’s 2002 “Fault Tree Handbook with Aerospace Applications” [Vesely 02] is an updated comprehensive primer of the NRC handbook, and the source for the notation used in this chapter. Both are available online as downloadable PDF files.