6.3 A Design Checklist for Interoperability
===

Table 6.3 is a checklist to support the design and analysis process for interoperability.

**Table 6.3** Checklist to Support the Design and Analysis Process for Interoperability

Category | Checklist
--|--
Allocation of Responsibilities | Determine which of your system responsibilities will need to interoperate with other systems.<br>Ensure that responsibilities have been allocated to detect a request to interoperate with known or unknown external systems.<br>Ensure that responsibilities have been allocated to carry out the following tasks:<br><li>Accept the request<br><li>Exchange information<br><li>Reject the request<br><li>Notify appropriate entities (people or systems)<br><li>Log the request (for interoperability in an untrusted environment, logging for nonrepudiation is essential)
Coordination Model | Ensure that the coordination mechanisms can meet the critical quality attribute requirements. Considerations for performance include the following:<br><li>Volume of traffic on the network both created by the systems under your control and generated by systems not under your control<br><li>Timeliness of the messages being sent by your systems<br><li>Currency of the messages being sent by your systems<br><li>Jitter of the messages’ arrival times<br><li>Ensure that all of the systems under your control make assumptions about protocols and underlying networks that are consistent with the systems not under your control.
Data Model | Determine the syntax and semantics of the major data abstractions that may be exchanged among interoperating systems.<br>Ensure that these major data abstractions are consistent with data from the interoperating systems. (If your system’s data model is confidential and must not be made public, you may have to apply transformations to and from the data abstractions of systems with which yours interoperates.)
Mapping among Architectural Elements | For interoperability, the critical mapping is that of components to processors. Beyond the necessity of making sure that components that communicate externally are hosted on processors that can reach the network, the primary considerations deal with meeting the security, availability, and performance requirements for the communication. These will be dealt with in their respective chapters.

----

Category | Checklist
--|--
Resource Management | Ensure that interoperation with another system (accepting a request and/or rejecting a request) can never exhaust critical system resources (e.g., can a flood of such requests cause service to be denied to legitimate users?).<br>Ensure that the resource load imposed by the communication requirements of interoperation is acceptable.<br>Ensure that if interoperation requires that resources be shared among the participating systems, an adequate arbitration policy is in place.
Binding Time | Determine the systems that may interoperate, and when they become known to each other. For each system over which you have control:<br><li>Ensure that it has a policy for dealing with binding to both known and unknown external systems.<br><li>Ensure that it has mechanisms in place to reject unacceptable bindings and to log such requests.<br><li>In the case of late binding, ensure that mechanisms will support the discovery of relevant new services or protocols, or the sending of information using chosen protocols.
Choice of Technology | For any of your chosen technologies, are they “visible” at the interface boundary of a system? If so, what interoperability effects do they have? Do they support, undercut, or have no effect on the interoperability scenarios that apply to your system? Ensure the effects they have are acceptable. Consider technologies that are designed to support interoperability, such as web services. Can they be used to satisfy the interoperability requirements for the systems under your control?