7.6 Discussion Questions 问题讨论
===

1. Modifiability comes in many flavors and is known by many names. Find
one of the IEEE or ISO standards dealing with quality attributes and compile a list of quality attributes that refer to some form of modifiability.
Discuss the differences.
2. For each quality attribute that you discovered as a result of the previous
question, write a modifiability scenario that expresses it.
3. In a certain metropolitan subway system, the ticket machines accept cash
but do not give change. There is a separate machine that dispenses change
but does not sell tickets. In an average station there are six or eight ticket
machines for every change machine. What modifiability tactics do you see
at work in this arrangement? What can you say about availability?
4. For the subway system in the previous question, describe the specific form
of modifiability (using a modifiability scenario) that seems to be the aim of
arranging the ticket and change machines as described.
5. A wrapper is a common aid to modifiability. A wrapper for a component
is the only element allowed to use that component; every other piece of
software uses the component’s services by going through the wrapper. The
wrapper transforms the data or control information for the component it
wraps. For example, a component may expect input using English measures
but find itself in a system in which all of the other components produce
metric measures. A wrapper could be employed to translate. What modifiability
tactics does a wrapper embody?
6. Once an intermediary has been introduced into an architecture, some modules
may attempt to circumvent it, either inadvertently (because they are
not aware of the intermediary) or intentionally (for performance, for convenience,
or out of habit). Discuss some architectural means to prevent inadvertent
circumvention of an intermediary.
7. In some projects, deployability is an important quality attribute that measures
how easy it is to get a new version of the system into the hands of its
users. This might mean a trip to your auto dealer or transmitting updates
over the Internet. It also includes the time it takes to install the update once
it arrives. In projects that measure deployability separately, should the cost
of a modification stop when the new version is ready to ship? Justify your
answer.
8. The abstract common services tactic is intended to reduce coupling, but it
also might reduce cohesion. Discuss.
9. Identify particular change scenarios for an automatic teller machine. What
modifications would you make to your automatic teller machine design to
accommodate these changes?