7 Modifiability 可修改性
===

_Adapt or perish, now as ever, is nature’s inexorable imperative._
—H.G. Wells

Change happens.

Study after study shows that most of the cost of the typical software system occurs after it has been initially released. If change is the only constant in the universe, then software change is not only constant but ubiquitous. Changes happen to add new features, to change or even retire old ones. Changes happen to fix defects, tighten security, or improve performance. Changes happen to enhance the user’s experience. Changes happen to embrace new technology, new platforms, new protocols, new standards. Changes happen to make systems work together, even if they were never designed to do so.

Modifiability is about change, and our interest in it centers on the cost and risk of making changes. To plan for modifiability, an architect has to consider four questions:

* What can change? A change can occur to any aspect of a system: the functions that the system computes, the platform (the hardware, operating system, middleware), the environment in which the system operates (the systems with which it must interoperate, the protocols it uses to communicate with the rest of the world), the qualities the system exhibits (its performance, its reliability, and even its future modifications), and its capacity (number of users supported, number of simultaneous operations).
* What is the likelihood of the change? One cannot plan a system for all potential changes—the system would never be done, or if it was done it would be far too expensive and would likely suffer quality attribute problems in other dimensions. Although anything might change, the architect has to make the tough decisions about which changes are likely, and hence which changes are to be supported, and which are not.
* When is the change made and who makes it? Most commonly in the past, a change was made to source code. That is, a developer had to make the change, which was tested and then deployed in a new release. Now, however, the question of when a change is made is intertwined with the question of who makes it. An end user changing the screen saver is clearly making a change to one of the aspects of the system. Equally clear, it is not in the same category as changing the system so that it can be used over the web rather than on a single machine. Changes can be made to the implementation (by modifying the source code), during compile (using compile-time switches), during build (by choice of libraries), during configuration setup (by a range of techniques, including parameter setting), or during execution (by parameter settings, plugins, etc.). A change can also be made by a developer, an end user, or a system administrator.
* What is the cost of the change? Making a system more modifiable involves two types of cost:
  * The cost of introducing the mechanism(s) to make the system more modifiable
  * The cost of making the modification using the mechanism(s)

For example, the simplest mechanism for making a change is to wait for a change request to come in, then change the source code to accommodate the request. The cost of introducing the mechanism is zero; the cost of exercising it is the cost of changing the source code and revalidating the system. At the other end of the spectrum is an application generator, such as a user interface builder. The builder takes as input a description of the designer user interface produced through direct manipulation techniques and produces (usually) source code. The cost of introducing the mechanism is the cost of constructing the UI builder, which can be substantial. The cost of using the mechanism is the cost of producing the input to feed the builder (cost can be substantial or negligible), the cost of running the builder (approximately zero), and then the cost of whatever testing is performed on the result (usually much less than usual).

For N similar modifications, a simplified justification for a change mechanism is that

```
N × Cost of making the change without the mechanism <
Cost of installing the mechanism +
(N × Cost of making the change using the mechanism).
```

N is the anticipated number of modifications that will use the modifiability mechanism, but N is a prediction. If fewer changes than expected come in, then an expensive modification mechanism may not be warranted. In addition, the cost of creating the modifiability mechanism could be applied elsewhere—in adding functionality, in improving the performance, or even in nonsoftware investments such as buying tech stocks. Also, the equation does not take time into account. It might be cheaper in the long run to build a sophisticated change-handling mechanism, but you might not be able to wait for that.
