8.6 discussion Questions
===

1. “Every system has real-time performance constraints.” Discuss. Or provide a counterexample.
2. Write a performance scenario that describes the average on-time flight ar-rival performance for an airline.
3. Write several performance scenarios for an automatic teller machine. Think about whether your major concern is worst-case latency, average-case la-tency, throughput, or some other response measure. How would you modify
your automatic teller machine design to accommodate these scenarios?
4. Web-based systems often use proxy servers, which are the first element of the system to receive a request from a client (such as your browser). Proxy servers are able to serve up often-requested web pages, such as a company’s home page, without bothering the real application servers that carry out transactions. There may be many proxy servers, and they are often located geographically close to large user communities, to decrease response time for routine requests. What performance tactics do you see at work here?
5. A fundamental difference between coordination mechanisms is whether interaction is synchronous or asynchronous. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each with respect to each of the performance responses: latency, deadline, throughput, jitter, miss rate, data loss, or any other re-quired performance-related response you may be used to.
6. Find real-world (that is, nonsoftware) examples of applying each of the manage-resources tactics. For example, suppose you were managing a brick-and-mortar big-box retail store. How would you get people through the checkout lines faster using these tactics?
7. User interface frameworks typically are single-threaded. Why is this so and what are the performance implications of this single-threading?