8 Performance 性能
===

_An ounce of performance is worth pounds of promises._  
—Mae West

It’s about time.

Performance, that is: It’s about time and the software system’s ability to meet timing requirements. When events occur—interrupts, messages, requests from users or other systems, or clock events marking the passage of time—the system, or some element of the system, must respond to them in time. Characterizing the events that can occur (and when they can occur) and the system or element’s time-based response to those events is the essence is discussing performance.

Web-based system events come in the form of requests from users (numbering in the tens or tens of millions) via their clients such as web browsers. In a control system for an internal combustion engine, events come from the operator’s controls and the passage of time; the system must control both the firing of the ignition when a cylinder is in the correct position and the mixture of the fuel to maximize power and efficiency and minimize pollution.

For a web-based system, the desired response might be expressed as number of transactions that can be processed in a minute. For the engine control system, the response might be the allowable variation in the firing time. In each case, the pattern of events arriving and the pattern of responses can be characterized, and this characterization forms the language with which to construct performance scenarios.

For much of the history of software engineering, performance has been the driving factor in system architecture. As such, it has frequently compromised the achievement of all other qualities. As the price/performance ratio of hardware continues to plummet and the cost of developing software continues to rise, other qualities have emerged as important competitors to performance.

Nevertheless, all systems have performance requirements, even if they are not expressed. For example, a word processing tool may not have any explicit performance requirement, but no doubt everyone would agree that waiting an hour (or a minute, or a second) before seeing a typed character appear on the screen is unacceptable. Performance continues to be a fundamentally important quality attribute for all software.

Performance is often linked to scalability—that is, increasing your system’s capacity for work, while still performing well. Technically, scalability is making your system easy to change in a particular way, and so is a kind of modifiability. In addition, we address scalability explicitly in Chapter 12.
