9.3 A Design Checklist for Security
===

Table 9.2 is a checklist to support the design and analysis process for security.

TABLE 9.2 Checklist to Support the Design and Analysis Process for Security

Category | Checklist
---|---
Allocation of Responsibilities | Determine which system responsibilities need to be secure. For each of these responsibilities, ensure that additional responsibilities have been allocated to do the following: <br><li> Identify the actor <br><li> Authenticate the actor <br><li> Authorize actors <br><li> Grant or deny access to data or services <br><li> Record attempts to access or modify data or services <br><li> Encrypt data <br><li> Recognize reduced availability for resources or services and inform appropriate personnel and restrict access <br><li> Recover from an attack <br><li> Verify checksums and hash values category checklist
Coordination Model | Determine mechanisms required to communicate and coordinate with other systems or individuals. For these communications, ensure that mechanisms for authenticating and authorizing the actor or system, and encrypting data for transmission across the connection, are in place. Ensure also that mechanisms exist for monitoring and recognizing unexpectedly high demands for resources or services as well as mechanisms for restricting or terminating the connection.
Data Model | Determine the sensitivity of different data fields. For each data abstraction: <br><li> Ensure that data of different sensitivity is separated. <br><li> Ensure that data of different sensitivity has different access rights and that access rights are checked prior to access. <br><li> Ensure that access to sensitive data is logged and that the log file is suitably protected. <br><li> Ensure that data is suitably encrypted and that keys are separated from the encrypted data. <br><li> Ensure that data can be restored if it is inappropriately modified.
Mapping among Architectural Elements | Determine how alternative mappings of architectural elements that are under consideration may change how an individual or system may read, write, or modify data; access system services or resources; or reduce availability to system services or resources. Determine how alternative mappings may affect the recording of access to data, services or resources and the recognition of unexpectedly high demands for resources. <br>For each such mapping, ensure that there are responsibilities to do the following: <br><li> Identify an actor <br><li> Authenticate an actor <br><li> Authorize actors <br><li> Grant or deny access to data or services <br><li> Record attempts to access or modify data or services <br><li> Encrypt data <br><li> Recognize reduced availability for resources or services, inform appropriate personnel, and restrict access <br><li> Recover from an attack
Resource Management | Determine the system resources required to identify and monitor a system or an individual who is internal or external, authorized or not authorized, with access to specific resources or all resources. Determine the resources required to authenticate the actor, grant or deny access to data or resources, notify appropriate entities (people or systems), record attempts to access data or resources, encrypt data, recognize inexplicably high demand for resources, inform users or systems, and restrict access. <br>For these resources consider whether an external entity can access a critical resource or exhaust a critical resource; how to monitor the resource; how to manage resource utilization; how to log resource utilization; and ensure that there are sufficient resources to perform the necessary security operations. <br>Ensure that a contaminated element can be prevented from contaminating other elements. <br>Ensure that shared resources are not used for passing sensitive data from an actor with access rights to that data to an actor without access rights to that data.
Binding Time | Determine cases where an instance of a late-bound component may be untrusted. For such cases ensure that late-bound components can be qualified; that is, if ownership certificates for late-bound components are required, there are appropriate mechanisms to manage and validate them; that access to late-bound data and services can be managed; that access by late-bound components to data and services can be blocked; that mechanisms to record the access, modification, and attempts to access data or services by late-bound components are in place; and that system data is encrypted where the keys are intentionally withheld for late-bound components
Choice of Technology | Determine what technologies are available to help user authentication, data access rights, resource protection, and data encryption. <br>Ensure that your chosen technologies support the tactics relevant for your security needs.
