9.5 For Further Reading
===

The architectural tactics that we have described in this chapter are only one as-pect of making a system secure. Other aspects are these:

* Coding. Secure Coding in C and C++ [Seacord 05] describes how to code securely. The Common Weakness Enumeration [CWE 12] is a list of the most common vulnerabilities discovered in systems.
* Organizational processes. Organizations must have processes that provide for responsibility for various aspects of security, including ensuring that systems are patched to put into place the latest protections. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) provides an enumeration of organizational processes [NIST 09]. [Cappelli 12] discusses insider threats.
* Technical processes. Microsoft has a life-cycle development process (The Secure Development Life Cycle) that includes modeling of threats. Four training classes are publicly available. www.microsoft.com/download/en/details.aspx?id=16420

NIST has several volumes that give definitions of security terms [NIST 04], categories of security controls [NIST 06], and an enumeration of security con-trols that an organization could employ [NIST 09]. A security control could be a tactic, but it could also be organizational, coding-related, or a technical process.

The attack surface of a system is the code that can be run by unauthorized users. A discussion of how to minimize the attack surface for a system can be found at [Howard 04].

Encryption and certificates of various types and strengths are commonly used to resist certain types of attacks. Encryption algorithms are particularly dif-ficult to code correctly. A document produced by NIST [NIST 02] gives require-ments for these algorithms.

Good books on engineering systems for security have been written by Ross Anderson [Anderson 08] and Bruce Schneier [Schneier 08].

Different domains have different specific sets of practices. The Payment Card Industry (PCI) has a set of standards intended for those involved in credit card processing (www.pcisecuritystandards.org). There is also a set of recom-mendations for securing various portions of the electric grid (www.smartgridipe-dia.org/index.php/ASAP-SG).

Data on the various sources of data breaches can be found in the Verizon 2012 Data Breach Investigations Report [Verizon 12].

John Viega has written several books about secure software development in various environments. See, for example, [Viega 01].
