9.6 Discussion Questions
===

1. Write a set of concrete scenarios for security for an automatic teller ma-chine. How would you modify your design for the automatic teller machine to satisfy these scenarios?
2. One of the most sophisticated attacks on record was carried out by a virus known as Stuxnet. Stuxnet first appeared in 2009 but became widely known in 2011 when it was revealed that it had apparently severely damaged or incapacitated the high-speed centrifuges involved in Iran’s uranium en-richment program. Read about Stuxnet and see if you can devise a defense
strategy against it based on the tactics in this chapter.
3. Some say that inserting security awareness into the software develop-ment life cycle is at least as important as designing software with security countermeasures. What are some examples of software development pro-cesses that can lead to more-secure systems?
4. Security and usability are often seen to be at odds with each other. Security often imposes procedures and processes that seem like needless overhead to the casual user. But some say that security and usability go (or should go) hand in hand and argue that making the system easy to use securely is the best way to promote security to the user. Discuss.
5. List some examples of critical resources for security that might become exhausted.
6. List an example of a mapping of architectural elements that has strong se-curity implications. Hint: think of where data is stored.
7. Which of the tactics in our list will protect against an insider threat? Can you think of any that should be added?
8. In the United States, Facebook can account for more than 5 percent of all Internet traffic in a given week. How would you recognize a denial-of-ser-vice attack on Facebook.com?
9. The public disclosure of vulnerabilities in production systems is a matter of controversy. Discuss why this is so and the pros and cons of public disclo-sure of vulnerabilities.
