11.1 Usability General Scenario
===

The portions of the usability general scenarios are these:
* _Source of stimulus_. The end user (who may be in a specialized role, such as a system or network administrator) is always the source of the stimulus for usability.
* _Stimulus_. The stimulus is that the end user wishes to use a system efficient-ly, learn to use the system, minimize the impact of errors, adapt the system, or configure the system.
* _Environment_. The user actions with which usability is concerned always occur at runtime or at system configuration time.
* _Artifact_. The artifact is the system or the specific portion of the system with which the user is interacting.
* _Response_. The system should either provide the user with the features need-ed or anticipate the user’s needs.
* _Response measure_. The response is measured by task time, number of errors, number of tasks accomplished, user satisfaction, gain of user knowledge, ratio of successful operations to total operations, or amount of time or data lost when an error occurs.

Table 11.1 enumerates the elements of the general scenario that characterize usability.

Figure 11.1 gives an example of a concrete usability scenario that you could generate using Table 11.1: The user downloads a new application and is using it productively after two minutes of experimentation.

TABLE 11.1 Usability General Scenario

Portion of Scenario | Possible Values
---|---
Source | End user, possibly in a specialized role
Stimulus | End user tries to use a system efficiently, learn to use the system, minimize the impact of errors, adapt the system, or configure the system.
Environment | Runtime or configuration time
Artifacts | System or the specific portion of the system with which the user is interacting
Response | The system should either provide the user with the features needed or anticipate the user’s needs.
Response Measure | One or more of the following: task time, number of errors, number of tasks accomplished, user satisfaction, gain of user knowledge, ratio of successful operations to total operations, or amount of time or data lost when an error occurs
