11.3 A Design Checklist for Usability
===

Table 11.2 is a checklist to support the design and analysis process for usability.

TABLE 11.2 Checklist to Support the Design and Analysis Process for Usability
Category | Checklist
---|---
Allocation of Responsibilities | Ensure that additional system responsibilities have been allocated, as needed, to assist the user in the following: <br><li> Learning how to use the system <br><li> Efficiently achieving the task at hand <br><li> Adapting and configuring the system <br><li> Recovering from user and system errors
Coordination Model | Determine whether the properties of system elements’ coordination—timeliness, currency, completeness, correctness, consistency—affect how a user learns to use the system, achieves goals or completes tasks, adapts and configures the system, recovers from user and system errors, and gains increased confidence and satisfaction. <br>For example, can the system respond to mouse events and give semantic feedback in real time? Can long-running events be canceled in a reasonable amount of time? 
Data Model | Determine the major data abstractions that are involved with user-perceivable behavior. Ensure these major data abstractions, their operations, and their properties have been designed to assist the user in achieving the task at hand, adapting and configuring the system, recovering from user and system errors, learning how to use the system, and increasing satisfaction and user confidence. <br>For example, the data abstractions should be designed to support undo and cancel operations: the transaction granularity should not be so great that canceling or undoing an operation takes an excessively long time.
Mapping among Architectural Elements | Determine what mapping among architectural elements is visible to the end user (for example, the extent to which the end user is aware of which services are local and which are remote). For those that are visible, determine how this affects the ways in which, or the ease with which, the user will learn how to use the system, achieve the task at hand, adapt and configure the system, recover from user and system errors, and increase confidence and satisfaction.
Resource Management | Determine how the user can adapt and configure the system’s use of resources. Ensure that resource limitations under all user-controlled configurations will not make users less likely to achieve their tasks. For example, attempt to avoid configurations that would result in excessively long response times. Ensure that the level of resources will not affect the users’ ability to learn how to use the system, or decrease their level of confidence and satisfaction with the system.
Binding Time | Determine which binding time decisions should be under user control and ensure that users can make decisions that aid in usability. For example, if the user can choose, at runtime, the system’s configuration, or its communication protocols, or its functionality via plug-ins, you need to ensure that such choices do not adversely affect the user’s ability to learn system features, use the system efficiently, minimize the impact of errors, further adapt and configure the system, or increase confidence and satisfaction.
Choice of Technology | Ensure the chosen technologies help to achieve the usability scenarios that apply to your system. For example, do these technologies aid in the creation of online help, the production of training materials, and the collection of user feedback? <br>How usable are any of your chosen technologies? Ensure the chosen technologies do not adversely affect the usability of the system (in terms of learning system features, using the system efficiently, minimizing the impact of errors, adapting/configuring the system, and increasing confidence and satisfaction).
