11.6 Discussion Questions
===

1. Write a concrete usability scenario for your automobile that specifies how long it takes you to set your favorite radio stations? Now consider another part of the driver experience and create scenarios that test other aspects of the response measures from the general scenario table.
2. Write a concrete usability scenario for an automatic teller machine. How would your design be modified to satisfy these scenarios?
3. How might usability trade off against security? How might it trade off against performance?
4. Pick a few of your favorite web sites that do similar things, such as social networking or online shopping. Now pick one or two appropriate responses from the usability general scenario (such as “achieve the task at hand”) and a correspondingly appropriate response measure. Using the response and response measure you chose, compare the web sites’ usability.
5. Specify the data model for a four-function calculator that allows undo.
6. Why is it that in so many systems, the cancel button in a dialog box appears to be unresponsive? What architectural principles do you think were ig-nored in these systems?
7. Why do you think that progress bars frequently behave erratically, moving from 10 to 90 percent in one step and then getting stuck on 90 percent?
8. Research the crash of Air France Flight 296 into the forest at Habsheim, France, on June 26, 1988. The pilots said they were unable to read the dig-ital display of the radio altimeter or hear its audible readout. If they could have, do you believe the crash would have been averted? In this context, discuss the relationship between usability and safety.
