11 Usability 可使用性
===

_Any darn fool can make something complex; it takes a genius to make something simple._  
—Albert Einstein

Usability is concerned with how easy it is for the user to accomplish a desired
task and the kind of user support the system provides. Over the years, a focus on
usability has shown itself to be one of the cheapest and easiest ways to improve a
system’s quality (or more precisely, the user’s perception of quality).
Usability comprises the following areas:

* _Learning system features._ If the user is unfamiliar with a particular system or a particular aspect of it, what can the system do to make the task of learning easier? This might include providing help features.
* _Using a system efficiently._ What can the system do to make the user more efficient in its operation? This might include the ability for the user to redirect the system after issuing a command. For example, the user may wish to suspend one task, perform several operations, and then resume that task.
* _Minimizing the impact of errors._ What can the system do so that a user error has minimal impact? For example, the user may wish to cancel a command issued incorrectly.
* _Adapting the system to user needs._ How can the user (or the system itself) adapt to make the user’s task easier? For example, the system may automatically fill in URLs based on a user’s past entries.
* _Increasing confidence and satisfaction._ What does the system do to give the user confidence that the correct action is being taken? For example, providing feedback that indicates that the system is performing a long-running task and the extent to which the task is completed will increase the user’s confidence in the system.
