12.2 Other Categories of Quality Attributes 质量属性的其他类别
===

We have primarily focused on product qualities in our discussions of quality at-tributes, but there are other types of quality attributes that measure “goodness” of something other than the final product. Here are three:

## Conceptual Integrity of the Architecture
Conceptual integrity refers to consistency in the design of the architecture, and it contributes to the understandability of the architecture and leads to fewer errors of confusion. Conceptual integrity demands that the same thing is done in the same way through the architecture. In an architecture with conceptual integrity, less is more. For example, there are countless ways that components can send information to each other: messages, data structures, signaling of events, and so forth. An architecture with conceptual integrity would feature one way only, and only provide alternatives if there was a compelling reason to do so. Similarly, components should all report and handle errors in the same way, log events or transactions in the same way, interact with the user in the same way, and so forth.

## Quality in Use
ISO/IEC 25010, which we discuss in Section 12.4, has a category of qualities that pertain to the use of the system by various stakeholders. For example, time-to-market is an important characteristic of a system, but it is not discernible from an examination of the product itself. Some of the qualities in this category are these:
* _Effectiveness_. This refers to the distinction between building the system correctly (the system performs according to its requirements) and building the correct system (the system performs in the manner the user wishes). Effectiveness is a measure of whether the system is correct.
* _Efficiency_. The effort and time required to develop a system. Put another way, what is the architecture’s impact on the project’s cost and schedule? Would a different set of architectural choices have resulted in a system that would be faster or cheaper to bring to fruition? Efficiency can include training time for developers; an architecture that uses technology unfamiliar to the staff on hand is less buildable. Is the architecture appropriate for the organization in terms of its experience and its available supporting infra-structure (such as test facilities or development environments)?
* _Freedom from risk_. The degree to which a product or system affects economic status, human life, health, or the environment.

A special case of efficiency is how easy it is to build (that is, compile and assemble) the system after a change. This becomes critical during testing. A recompile process that takes hours or overnight is a schedule-killer. Architects have control over this by managing dependencies among modules. If the archi-tect doesn’t do this, then what often happens is that some bright-eyed developer writes a makefile early on, it works, and people add to it and add to it. Eventually the project ends up with a seven-hour compile step and very unhappy integrators and testers who are already behind schedule (because they always are).

## Marketability
An architecture’s marketability is another quality attribute of concern. Some sys-tems are well known by their architectures, and these architectures sometimes carry a meaning all their own, independent of what other quality attributes they bring to the system. The current craze in building cloud-based systems has taught us that the perception of an architecture can be more important than the qualities the architecture brings. Many organizations have felt they had to build cloud-based systems (or some other technology du jour) whether or not that was the correct technical choice.
