12.7 Discussion Questions
===

1. The Kingdom of Bhutan measures the happiness of its population, and government policy is formulated to increase Bhutan’s GNH (gross national happiness). Go read about how the GNH is measured (try www.grossna-tionalhappiness.com) and then sketch a general scenario for the quality attribute of happiness that will let you express concrete happiness require-ments for a software system.
2. Choose a quality attribute not described in Chapters 5–11. For that quality attribute, assemble a set of specific scenarios that describe what you mean by it. Use that set of scenarios to construct a general scenario for it.
3. For the QA you chose for discussion question 2, assemble a set of design approaches (patterns and tactics) that help you achieve it.
4. For the QA you chose for discussion question 2, develop a design checklist for that quality attribute using the seven categories of guiding quality de-sign decisions outlined in Chapter 4.
5. What might cause you to add a tactic or pattern to the sets of quality attri-butes already described in Chapters 5–11 (or any other quality attribute, for that matter)?
6. According to slate.com and other sources, a teenage girl in Germany “went into hiding after she forgot to set her Facebook birthday invitation to private and accidentally invited the entire Internet. After 15,000 people confirmed they were coming, the girl’s parents canceled the party, notified police, and hired private security to guard their home.” Fifteen hundred people showed up anyway; several minor injuries ensued. Is Facebook “unsafe”? Discuss.
7. Author James Gleick (“A Bug and a Crash,” www.around.com/ariane.html) writes that “It took the European Space Agency 10 years and $7 billion to produce Ariane 5, a giant rocket capable of hurling a pair of three-ton sat-ellites into orbit with each launch. . . . All it took to explode that rocket less than a minute into its maiden voyage . . . was a small computer program trying to stuff a 64-bit number into a 16-bit space. One bug, one crash. Of all the careless lines of code recorded in the annals of computer science, this one may stand as the most devastatingly efficient.” Write a safety sce-nario that addresses the Ariane 5 disaster and discuss tactics that might have prevented it.
8. Discuss how you think development distributability tends to “trade off” against the quality attributes of performance, availability, modifiability, and interoperability. Extra Credit: Close your eyes and, without peeking, spell “distributability.” Bonus points for successfully saying “development distributability” three times as fast as you can.
9. What is the relationship between mobility and security?
10. Relate monitorability to observability and controllability, the two parts of testability. Are they the same? If you want to make your system more of one, can you just optimize for the other?
