13.1 Architectural Patterns 架构模式
===

An architectural pattern establishes a relationship between:
* _A context_. A recurring, common situation in the world that gives rise to a problem.
* _A problem_. The problem, appropriately generalized, that arises in the given context. The pattern description outlines the problem and its variants, and describes any complementary or opposing forces. The description of the problem often includes quality attributes that must be met.
* _A solution_. A successful architectural resolution to the problem, appro-priately abstracted. The solution describes the architectural structures that solve the problem, including how to balance the many forces at work. The solution will describe the responsibilities of and static rela-tionships among elements (using a module structure), or it will describe the runtime behavior of and interaction between elements (laying out a component-and-connector or allocation structure). The solution for a pat-tern is determined and described by:
    * A set of element types (for example, data repositories, processes, and objects)
    * A set of interaction mechanisms or connectors (for example, method calls, events, or message bus)
    * A topological layout of the components
    * A set of semantic constraints covering topology, element behavior, and interaction mechanisms 

The solution description should also make clear what quality attributes are provided by the static and runtime configurations of elements.

This {_context_, _problem_, _solution_} form constitutes a template for document-ing a pattern.

Complex systems exhibit multiple patterns at once. A web-based system might employ a three-tier client-server architectural pattern, but within this pat-tern it might also use replication (mirroring), proxies, caches, firewalls, MVC, and so forth, each of which may employ more patterns and tactics. And all of these parts of the client-server pattern likely employ layering to internally struc-ture their software modules.
