13.5 Summary 小结
===

An architectural pattern
* is a package of design decisions that is found repeatedly in practice,
* has known properties that permit reuse, and
* describes a class of architectures.

Because patterns are (by definition) found repeatedly in practice, one does not invent them; one discovers them.

Tactics are simpler than patterns. Tactics typically use just a single structure or computational mechanism, and they are meant to address a single architectural force. For this reason they give more precise control to an architect when making design decisions than patterns, which typically combine multiple design decisions into a package. Tactics are the “building blocks” of design from which architectural patterns are created. Tactics are atoms and patterns are molecules.

An architectural pattern establishes a relationship between:
* A context. A recurring, common situation in the world that gives rise to a problem.
* A problem. The problem, appropriately generalized, that arises in the given context.
* A solution. A successful architectural resolution to the problem,
appropriately abstracted.

Complex systems exhibit multiple patterns at once.

Patterns can be categorized by the dominant type of elements that they show: module patterns show modules, component-and-connector patterns show compo-nents and connectors, and allocation patterns show a combination of software elements (modules, components, connectors) and nonsoftware elements. Most published patterns are C&C patterns, but there are module patterns and allocation patterns as well. This chapter showed examples of each type.

A pattern is described as a solution to a class of problems in a general con-text. When a pattern is chosen and applied, the context of its application becomes very specific. A documented pattern is therefore underspecified with respect to applying it in a specific situation. We can make a pattern more specific to our problem by augmenting it with tactics. Applying successive tactics is like mov-ing through a game space, and is a little like chess: the consequences of the next move are important, and looking several moves ahead is helpful.
