13.6 For Further Reading
===

There are many existing repositories of patterns and books written about patterns. The original and most well-known work on object-oriented design patterns is by the “Gang of Four” [Gamma 94].

The Gang of Four’s discussion of patterns included patterns at many levels of abstraction. In this chapter we have focused entirely on architectural patterns. The patterns that we have presented here are intended as representative examples. This chapter’s inventory of patterns is in no way meant to be exhaustive. For example, while we describe the SOA pattern, entire repositories of SOA patterns (refinements of the basic SOA pattern) have been created. A good place to start is www.soapatterns.org.

Some good references for pattern-oriented architecture are [Buschmann 96], [Hanmer 07], [Schmidt 00], and [Kircher 03].

A good place to learn more about the map-reduce pattern is Google’s foun-dational paper on it [Dean 04].

Map-reduce is the tip of the spear of the so-called “NoSQL” movement, which seeks to displace the relational database from its venerable and taken-for-granted status in large data-processing systems. The movement has some of the revolutionary flavor of the Agile movement, except that NoSQL advocates are claiming a better (for them) technology, as opposed to a better process. You can easily find NoSQL podcasts, user forums, conferences, and blogs; it’s also dis-cussed in Chapter 26.

[Bachmann 07] discusses the use of tactics in the layered pattern and is the source for some of our discussion of that.

The passage in this chapter about augmenting ping/echo with other tactics to achieve the desired combination of quality attributes is based on the work of Kiran Kumar and TV Prabhakar [Kumar 10a] and [Kumar 10b].

[Urdangarin 08] is the source of the work assignment patterns described in Section 13.2.

The Adventure Builder system shown in Figures 13.11 and 13.15 comes from [AdvBuilder 10].
