14.2 Quality Attribute Checklists
===

For some quality attributes, checklists exist to enable the architect to test com-pliance or to guide the architect when making design decisions. Quality attribute checklists can come from industry consortia, from government organizations, or from private organizations. In large organizations they may be developed in house.

These checklists can be specific to one or more quality attributes; checklists for safety, security, and usability are common. Or they may be focused on a par-ticular domain; there are security checklists for the financial industry, industrial process control, and the electric energy sector. They may even focus on some specific aspect of a single quality attribute: cancel for usability, as an example.

For the purposes of certification or regulation, the checklists can be used by auditors as well as by the architect. For example, two of the items on the checklist of the Payment Card Industry (PCI) are to only persist credit card numbers in an encrypted form and to never persist the security code from the back of the credit card. An auditor can ask to examine stored credit card data to determine whether it has been encrypted. The auditor can also examine the schema for data being stored to see whether the security code has been included.

This example reveals that design and analysis are often two sides of the same coin. By considering the kinds of analysis to which a system will be sub-jected (in this case, an audit), the architect will be led into making important early architectural decisions (making the decisions the auditors will want to find).

Security checklists usually have heavy process components. For example, a security checklist might say that there should be an explicit security policy within an organization, and a cognizant security officer to ensure compliance with the policy. They also have technical components that the architect needs to examine to determine the implications on the architecture of the system being designed or evaluated. For example, the following is an item from a security checklist gener-ated by a group chartered by an organization of electric producers and distribu-tors. It pertains to embedded systems delivering electricity to your home:

  A designated system or systems shall daily or on request obtain current version numbers, installation date, configuration settings, patch level on all elements of a [portion of the electric distribution] system,

>
> **In Search of a Grand Unified Theory for Quality Attributes**
> 
> How do we create analytic models for those quality attribute aspects for which none currently exist? I do not know the answer to this question, but if we had a basis set for quality attributes, we would be in a better position to create and validate quality attribute models. By basis set I mean a set of orthogonal concepts that allow one to define the existing set of quality attributes. Currently there is much overlap among quality attributes; a basis set would enable discussion of tradeoffs in terms of a common set of fundamental and possibly quantifiable concepts. Once we have a basis set, we could develop analytic models for each of the elements of the set, and then an analytic model for a particular quality attribute becomes a composition of the models of the portions of the basis set that make up that quality attribute.
>
> What are some of the elements of this basis set? Here are some of my candidates:
> * _Time_. Time is the basis for performance, some aspects of availability, and some aspects of usability. Time will surely be one of the fundamen-tal concepts for defining quality attributes.
> * _Dependencies_ among structural elements. Modifiability, security, avail-ability, and performance depend in some form or another on the strength of connections among various structural elements. Coupling is a form of dependency. Attacks depend on being able to move from one com-promised element to a currently uncompromised element through some dependency. Fault propagation depends on dependencies. And one of the key elements of performance analysis is the dependency of one computation on another. Enumeration of the fundamental forms of de-pendency and their properties will enable better understanding of many quality attributes and their interaction.
> * _Access_. How does a system promote or deny access through various mechanisms? Usability is concerned with allowing smooth access for humans; security is concerned with allowing smooth access for some set of requests but denying access to another set of requests. Interoperabili-ty is concerned with establishing connections and accessing information. Race conditions, which undermine availability, come about through un-mediated access to critical computations.
>
> These are some of my candidates. I am sure there are others. The general problem is to define a set of candidates for the basis set and then show how current definitions of various quality attributes can be recast in terms of the elements of the basis set. I am convinced that this is a problem that needs to be solved prior to making substantial progress in the quest for a rich enough set of analytic models to enable prediction of system behav-ior across the quality attributes important for a system.
> 
> —LB

compare these with inventory and configuration databases, and log all discrepancies.

This kind of rule is intended to detect malware masquerading as legitimate components of a system. The architect will look at this item and conclude the following:
* The embedded portions of the system should be able to report their version number, installation date, configuration settings, and patch levels. One tech-nique for doing this is to use “reflection” for each component in the system. Reflection now becomes one of the important patterns used in this system.
* Each software update or patch should maintain this information. One tech-nique for doing this is to have automated update and patch mechanisms. The architecture could also realize this functionality through reflection.
* A system must be designated to query the embedded components and per-sist the information. This means
* There must be overall inventory and configuration databases.
* Logs of discrepancies between current values and overall inventory must be generated and sent to appropriate recipients.
* There must be network connections to the embedded components. This affects the network topology.

The creation of quality attribute checklists is usually a time-consuming ac-tivity, undertaken by multiple individuals and typically refined and evolved over time. Domain specialists, quality attribute specialists, and architects should all contribute to the development and validation of these checklists.

The architect should treat the items on an applicable checklist as require-ments, in that they need to be understood and prioritized. Under particular cir-cumstances, an item in a checklist may not be met, but the architect should have a compelling case as to why it is not.
