14.5 Analysis at Different Stages of the Life Cycle
===

Depending on your project’s state of development, different forms of analysis are possible. Each form of analysis comes with its own costs. And there are different levels of confidence associated with each analysis technique. These are summa-rized in Table 14.3.

TABLE 14.3 Forms of Analysis, Their Life-Cycle Stage, Cost, and Confidence in Their Outputs

Life-Cycle Stage | Form of Analysis | Cost | Confidence
---|---|---|---
Requirements | Experience-based analogy | Low | Low–High
Requirements | Back-of-the-envelope | Low | Low–Medium
Architecture | Thought experiment | Low | Low–Medium
Architecture | Checklist | Low | Medium
Architecture | Analytic model | Low–Medium | Medium
Architecture | Simulation | Medium | Medium
Architecture | Prototype | Medium | Medium–High
Implementation | Experiment | Medium–High | Medium–High
Fielded System | Instrumentation | Medium–High | High

The table shows that analysis performed later in the life cycle yields results that merit high confidence. However, this confidence comes at a price. First, the cost of performing the analysis also tends to be higher. But the cost of changing the system to fix a problem uncovered by analysis skyrockets later in the life cycle.

Choosing an appropriate form of analysis requires a consideration of all of the factors listed in Table 14.3: What life-cycle stage are you currently in? How important is the achievement of the quality attribute in question and how worried are you about being able to achieve the goals for this attribute? And finally, how much budget and schedule can you afford to allocate to this form of risk miti-gation? Each of these considerations will lead you to choose one or more of the analysis techniques described in this chapter.
