14.6 Summary
===

Analysis of an architecture enables early prediction of a system’s qualities. We can analyze an architecture to see how the system or systems we build from it will per-form with respect to their quality attribute goals. Some quality attributes, most nota-bly performance and availability, have well-understood, time-tested analytic models that can be used to assist in quantitative analysis. Other quality attributes have less sophisticated models that can nevertheless help with predictive analysis.

For some quality attributes, checklists exist to enable the architect to test compliance or to guide the architect when making design decisions. Quality at-tribute checklists can come from industry consortia, from government organiza-tions, or from private organizations. In large organizations they may be devel-oped in house. The architect should treat the items on an applicable checklist as requirements, in that they need to be understood and prioritized.

Thought experiments and back-of-the-envelope analysis can often quickly help find problems or confirm the nonexistence of problems with respect to qual-ity attribute requirements. A thought experiment may consider several of the quality attribute requirements simultaneously; typically it will focus on just the most important ones. Experiments, simulations, and prototypes allow the explo-ration of tradeoffs, by helping to turn unknown architectural parameters into con-stants or ranges whose values may be measured rather than estimated.

Depending on your project’s state of development, different forms of analy-sis are possible. Each form of analysis comes with its own costs and its own level of confidence associated with each analysis technique.
