14 Quality Attribute Modeling and Analysis 质量属性模型和分析
===

_Do not believe in anything simply because you have
heard it . . . Do not believe in anything merely on
the authority of your teachers and elders. Do not
believe in traditions because they have been handed
down for many generations. But after observation
and analysis, when you find that anything agrees
with reason and is conducive to the good and benefit
of one and all, then accept it and live up to it._  
—Prince Gautama Siddhartha

In Chapter 2 we listed thirteen reasons why architecture is important, worth studying, and worth practicing. Reason 6 is that the analysis of an architecture enables early prediction of a system’s qualities. This is an extraordinarily powerful reason! Without it, we would be reduced to building systems by choosing various structures, implementing the system, measuring the system for its quality attribute responses, and all along the way hoping for the best. Architecture lets us do better than that, much better. We can analyze an architecture to see how the system or systems we build from it will perform with respect to their quality attribute goals, even before a single line of code has been written. This chapter will explore how.

The methods available depend, to a large extent, on the quality attribute to be analyzed. Some quality attributes, especially performance and availability, have well-understood and strongly validated analytic modeling techniques. Other quality attributes, for example security, can be analyzed through checklists. Still others can be analyzed through back-of-the-envelope calculations and thought experiments.

Our topics in this chapter range from the specific, such as creating models and analyzing checklists, to the general, such as how to generate and carry out the thought experiments to perform early (and necessarily crude) analysis. Models and checklists are focused on particular quality attributes but can aid in the analysis of any system with respect to those attributes. Thought experiments, on the other hand, can consider multiple quality attributes simultaneously but are only applicable to the specific system under consideration.
