15 Architecutre in Agile Projects 敏捷项目中的架构
===

_It is not the strongest of the species that survives, nor the most intelligent that survives. It is the one that is the most adaptable to change._  
—Charles Darwin

Since their first appearance over a decade ago, the various flavors of Agile methods and processes have received increasing attention and adoption by the worldwide software community. New software processes do not just emerge out of thin air; they evolve in response to a palpable need. In this case, the software development world was responding to a need for projects to be more responsive to their stakeholders, to be quicker to develop functionality that users care about, to show more and earlier progress in a project’s life cycle, and to be less burdened by documenting aspects of a project that would inevitably change. Is any of this inimical to the use of architecture? We emphatically say “no.” In fact, the question for a software project is not “Should I do Agile or architecture?”, but rather questions such as “How much architecture should I do up front versus how much should I defer until the project’s requirements have solidified somewhat?”, “When and how should I refactor?”, and “How much of the architecture should I formally document, and when?” We believe that there are good answers to all of these questions, and that Agile and architecture are not just well suited to live together but in fact critical companions for many software projects.

The Agile software movement began to receive considerable public attention approximately a decade ago, with the release of the “Agile Manifesto.” Its roots extend at least a decade earlier than that, in practices such as Extreme Programming and Scrum. The Agile Manifesto, originally signed by 17 developers, was however a brilliant public relations move; it is brief, pithy, and sensible;

> **Manifesto for Agile Software Development**
>
> We are uncovering better ways of developing software by doing it and helping others do it. Through this work we have come to value:
>
>  _ | _ | _
> --|--|--
> Individuals and interactions | over | processes and tools
> Working software | over | comprehensive documentation
> Customer collaboration | over | contract negotiation
> Responding to change | over | following a plan
>
> That is, while there is value in the items on the right, we value the items on the left more. <agilemanifesto.org>

The authors of the Manifesto go on to describe the twelve principles that underlie their reasoning:

1. Our highest priority is to satisfy the customer through early and continuous delivery of valuable software.
2. Welcome changing requirements, even late in development. Agile processes harness change for the customer’s competitive advantage.
3. Deliver working software frequently, from a couple of weeks to a couple of months, with a preference to the shorter timescale.
4. Business people and developers must work together daily throughout the project.
5. Build projects around motivated individuals. Give them the environment and support they need, and trust them to get the job done.
6. The most efficient and effective method of conveying information to and within a development team is face-to-face conversation.
7. Working software is the primary measure of progress.
8. Agile processes promote sustainable development. The sponsors, developers, and users should be able to maintain a constant pace indefinitely.
9. Continuous attention to technical excellence and good design enhances agility.
10. Simplicity—the art of maximizing the amount of work not done—is essential.
11. The best architectures, requirements, and designs emerge from self-organizing teams.
12. At regular intervals, the team reflects on how to become more effective, then tunes and adjusts its behavior accordingly.

There has been considerable elaboration of the Agile Manifesto, and Agile processes, since its first release, but the basic principles have remained solid. The Agile movement (and its predecessors) have gained considerable attention and have enjoyed widespread adoption over the past two decades. These processes were initially employed on small- to medium-sized projects with short time frames and enjoyed considerable success. They were not often used for larger projects, particularly those with distributed development. This is not surprising, given the twelve principles.

In particular principles 4 and 6 imply the need for co-location or, if co-location is not possible, then at least a high level of communication among the distributed teams. Indeed, one of the core practices of Agile projects is frequent (often daily) face-to-face meetings. Principle 11 says that, for best results, teams should be self-organizing. But self-organization is a social process that is much more cumbersome if those teams are not physically co-located. In this case we believe that the creators of the twelve Agile principles got it wrong. The best teams may be self-organizing, but the best architectures still require much more than this—technical skill, deep experience, and deep knowledge.

Principle 1 argues for “early and continuous delivery of valuable software” and principle 7 claims that “Working software is the primary measure of progress.” One might argue that a focus on early and continuous release of software, where “working” is measured in terms of customer-facing features, leaves little time for addressing the kinds of cross-cutting concerns and infrastructure critical to a high-quality large-scale system.

It has been claimed by some that there is an inherent tension between being agile and doing a conscientious job of architecting. But is there truly a tension? And if so, how do you go about characterizing it and reasoning about it? In short, how much architecture is the “right” amount of architecture?

Our brief answer, in this chapter, is that there is no tension. This issue is not “Agile versus Architecture” but rather “how best to blend Agile and Architecture.”

One more point, before we dive into the details: The Agile Manifesto is itself a compromise: a pronouncement created by a committee. The fact that architecture doesn’t clearly live anywhere within it is most likely because they had no consensus opinion on this topic and not because there is any inherent conflict.
