15.2 Agility and Architecture Methods
===

Throughout this book we emphasize methods for architecture design, analysis, and documentation. We unabashedly like methods! And so does the Agile com-munity: dozens of books have been written on Scrum, Extreme Programming, Crystal Clear, and other Agile methods. But how should we think of architec-ture-centric techniques and methods in an Agile context? How well do they fit with the twelve Agile principles, for example?

We believe that they fit very well. The methods we present are based on the essential elements needed to perform the activity. If you believe that architecture needs to be designed, analyzed, and documented, then the techniques we present are essential regardless of the project in which they are embedded. The methods we present are essentially driven by the motivation to reduce risk, and by consid-erations of costs and benefits.

Among all of our methods—for extracting architecturally significant re-quirements, for architecture design, for architecture evaluation, for architecture documentation—that you’ll see in subsequent chapters, one might expect the greatest Agile friction from evaluation and documentation. And so the rest of this section will examine those two practices in an Agile context.

## Architecture Documentation and YAGNI

Our approach to architecture documentation is called Views and Beyond, and it will be discussed in Chapter 18. Views and Beyond and Agile agree emphatically on the following point: If information isn’t needed, don’t spend the resources to document it. All documentation should have an intended use and audience in mind, and be produced in a way that serves both.

One of our fundamental principles of technical documentation is “Write for the reader.” That means understanding who will read the documentation and how they will use it. If there is no audience, there is no need to produce the documentation. This principle is so important in Agile methods that it has been given its own name: YAGNI. YAGNI means “you ain’t gonna need it,” and it refers to the idea that you should only implement or document something when you actually have the need for it. Do not spend time attempting to anticipate all possible needs.

The Views and Beyond approach uses the architectural view as the “unit” of documentation to be produced. Selecting the views to document is an example of applying this principle. The Views and Beyond approach prescribes producing a view if and only if it addresses substantial concerns of an important stakeholder community. And because documentation is not a monolithic activity that holds up all other progress until it is complete, the view selection method prescribes pro-ducing the documentation in prioritized stages to satisfy the needs of the stake-holders who need it now.

We document the portions of the architecture that we need to teach to newcomers, that embody significant potential risks if not properly managed, and that we need to change frequently. We document what we need to convey to readers so they can do their job. Although “classic” Agile emphasizes doc-umenting the minimum amount needed to let the current team of developers make progress, our approach emphasizes that the reader might be a maintainer assigned to make a technology upgrade years after the original development team has disbanded.

## Architecture Evaluation

Could an architecture evaluation work as part of an Agile process? Absolutely. In fact, doing so is perfectly Agile-consistent, because meeting stakeholders’ im-portant concerns is a cornerstone of Agile philosophy.

Our approach to architecture evaluation is exemplified by the Architecture Tradeoff Analysis Method (ATAM) of Chapter 21. It does not endeavor to an-alyze all, or even most, of an architecture. Rather, the focus is determined by a set of quality attribute scenarios that represent the most important (but by no means all) of the concerns of the stakeholders. “Most important” is judged by the amount of value the scenario brings to the architecture’s stakeholders, or the amount of risk present in achieving the scenario. Once these scenarios have been elicited, validated, and prioritized, they give us an evaluation agenda based on what is important to the success of the system, and what poses the greatest risk for the system’s success. Then we only delve into those areas that pose high risk for the achievement of the system’s main functions and qualities.

And as we will see in Chapter 21, it is easy to tailor a lightweight architec-ture evaluation, for quicker and less-costly analysis and feedback whenever in the project it is called for.
