15.5 Summary 小结
===

The Agile software movement is emblemized by the Agile Manifesto and a set of principles that assign high value to close-knit teams and continuous and fre-quent delivery of working software. Agile processes were initially employed on small- to medium-sized projects with short time frames and enjoyed considerable success. They were not often used for larger projects, particularly those with dis-tributed development.

Although there might appear to be an inherent tension between being ag-ile and architecture practices of the sort prescribed in this book, the underlying philosophies are not at odds and can be married to great effect. Successful proj-ects need a successful blend of the two approaches. Too much up-front planning and commitment can be stifling and unresponsive to customers’ needs, whereas too much agility can simply result in chaos. Agile architects tend to take a middle ground, proposing an initial architecture and running with that, until its technical debt becomes too great, at which point they need to refactor.

Boehm and Turner, analyzing historical data from 161 industrial projects, examined the effects of up-front architecture and risk resolution effort. They found that projects tend to have a “sweet spot” where some up-front architecture planning pays off and is not wasteful.

Among this book’s architecture methods, documentation and evaluation might seem to be where the most friction with Agile philosophies might lie. However, our approaches to these activities are risk-based and embodied in meth-ods that help you focus effort where it will most pay off.

The WebArrow example showed how adding experimentation to the proj-ect’s processes enabled it to obtain benefits from both architecture and classic Agile practices, and be responsive to ever-changing requirements and domain understanding.
