15.6 For Further Reading 进一步阅读
===

Agile comes in many flavors. Here are some of the better-known ones:
* Extreme Programming [Beck 04]
* Scrum [Schwaber 04]
* Feature-Driven Development [Palmer 02]
* Crystal Clear [Cockburn 04]

The journal IEEE Software devoted an entire special issue in 2010 to the topic of agility and architecture. The editor’s introduction [Abrahamsson 10] dis-cusses many of the issues that we have raised here.

George Fairbanks in his book Just Enough Architecture [Fairbanks 10] pro-vides techniques that are very compatible with Agile methods.

Barry Boehm and Richard Turner [Boehm 04] offer a data- and analy-sis-driven perspective on the risks and tradeoffs involved in the continuum of choices regarding agility and what they called “discipline.” The choice of “agil-ity versus discipline” in the title of the book has angered and alienated many practitioners of Agile methods, most of which are quite disciplined. While this book does not focus specifically on architecture, it does touch on the subject in many ways. This work was expanded upon in 2010, when Boehm, Lane, Kool-manojwong, and Turner described the Incremental Commitment Model and its relationship to agility and architecture [Boehm 10]. All of Boehm and colleagues’ work is informed by an active attention to risk. The seminal article on software risk management [Boehm 91] was written by Barry Boehm, more than 20 years ago, and it is still relevant and compelling reading today.

Carriere, Kazman, and Ozkaya [Carriere 10] provide a way to reason about when and where in an architecture you should do refactoring—to reduce techni-cal debt—based on an analysis of the propagation cost of anticipated changes.

The article by Graham, Kazman, and Walmsley [Graham 07] provides sub-stantially more detail on the WebArrow case study of agile architecting, includ-ing a number of architectural diagrams and additional description of the experi-mentation performed.

Ward Cunningham first coined the term “technical debt” in 1992 [Cunning-ham 92]. Brown et al. [Brown 10], building in part on Cunningham’s work, offer an economics-driven perspective on how to enable agility through architecture.

Robert Nord, Jim Tomayko, and Rob Wojcik [Nord 04] have analyzed the relationship between several of the Software Engineering Institute’s architecture methods and Extreme Programming. Grady Booch has blogged extensively on the relationship between architecture and Agile in his blog, for example [Booch 11].

Felix Bachmann [Bachmann 11] has provided a concrete example of a light-weight version of the ATAM that fits well with Agile projects and principles.
