16 Architecture and Requirements
===

_The two most important requirements for major success are: first, being in the right lace at the right time, and second, doing something about it._  
—Ray Kroc

Architectures exist to build systems that satisfy requirements. That’s obvious. What may be less obvious is that, to an architect, not all requirements are created equal. Some have a much more profound effect on the architecture than others. An architecturally significant requirement (ASR) is a requirement that will have a profound effect on the architecture—that is, the architecture might well be dramatically different in the absence of such a requirement.

You cannot hope to design a successful architecture if you do not know the ASRs. ASRs often, but not always, take the form of quality attribute requirements—the performance, security, modifiability, availability, usability, and so forth, that the architecture must provide to the system. In Chapters 5–13 we introduced patterns and tactics to achieve quality attributes. Each time you select a pattern or tactic to use in your architecture, you are changing the architecture as a result of the need to meet quality attribute requirements. The more difficult and important the QA requirement, the more likely it is to significantly affect the architecture, and hence to be an ASR.

Architects have to identify ASRs, usually after doing a significant bit of work to uncover candidate ASRs. Competent architects know this, and as we observe experienced architects going about their duties, we notice that the first thing they do is start talking to the important stakeholders. They’re gathering the information they need to produce the architecture that will respond to the project’s needs—whether or not this information has already been identified.

This chapter provides some systematic means for identifying the ASRs and other factors that will shape the architecture.
