16.2 Gathering ASRs by Interviewing Stakeholders 通过采访利益相关者收集ASR
===

Say your project isn’t producing a comprehensive requirements document. Or it is, but it’s not going to have the QAs nailed down by the time you need to start your design work. What do you do?

Architects are often called upon to help set the quality attribute requirements for a system. Projects that recognize this and encourage it are much more likely to be successful than those that don’t. Relish the opportunity. Stakeholders often have no idea what QAs they want in a system, and no amount of nagging is going to suddenly instill the necessary insight. If you insist on quantitative QA require-ments, you’re likely to get numbers that are arbitrary, and there’s a good chance that you’ll find at least some of those requirements will be very difficult to satisfy.

Architects often have very good ideas about what QAs are exhibited by sim-ilar systems, and what QAs are reasonable (and reasonably straightforward) to provide. Architects can usually provide quick feedback as to which quality attri-butes are going to be straightforward to achieve and which are going to be prob-lematic or even prohibitive. And architects are the only people in the room who can say, “I can actually deliver an architecture that will do better than what you had in mind—would that be useful to you?”

Interviewing the relevant stakeholders is the surest way to learn what they know and need. Once again, it behooves a project to capture this critical informa-tion in a systematic, clear, and repeatable way. Gathering this information from stakeholders can be achieved by many methods. One such method is the Quality Attribute Workshop (QAW), described in the sidebar.

The results of stakeholder interviews should include a list of architectural drivers and a set of QA scenarios that the stakeholders (as a group) prioritized. This information can be used to do the following:
* Refine system and software requirements
* Understand and clarify the system’s architectural drivers
* Provide rationale for why the architect subsequently made certain design decisions
* Guide the development of prototypes and simulations
* Influence the order in which the architecture is developed

>
> **The Quality Attribute Workshop**
> 
> The QAW is a facilitated, stakeholder-focused method to generate, prior-itize, and refine quality attribute scenarios before the software architec-ture is completed. The QAW is focused on system-level concerns and specifically the role that software will play in the system. The QAW is keenly dependent on the participation of system stakeholders. [^1]
>
> The QAW involves the following steps:
> 
> _Step 1: QAW Presentation and Introductions._ QAW facilitators describe the motivation for the QAW and explain each step of the method. Everyone introduces themselves, briefly stating their background, their role in the organization, and their relationship to the system being built.
>
> _Step 2: Business/Mission Presentation._ The stakeholder representing the business concerns behind the system (typically a manager or management representative) spends about one hour presenting the system’s business context, broad functional requirements, constraints, and known quality attribute requirements. The quality attributes that will be refined in later steps will be derived largely from the business/mission needs presented in
this step.
>
> _Step 3: Architectural Plan Presentation._ Although a detailed system or software architecture might not exist, it is possible that broad system descriptions, context drawings, or other artifacts have been created that describe some of the system’s technical details. At this point in the work-shop, the architect will present the system architectural plans as they stand. This lets stakeholders know the current architectural thinking, to the extent that it exists.
>
> _Step 4: Identification of Architectural Drivers._ The facilitators will share their list of key architectural drivers that they assembled during steps 2 and 3, and ask the stakeholders for clarifications, additions, deletions, and cor-rections. The idea is to reach a consensus on a distilled list of architectural drivers that includes overall requirements, business drivers, constraints, and quality attributes.
>
> _Step 5: Scenario Brainstorming._ Each stakeholder expresses a scenario representing his or her concerns with respect to the system. Facilitators ensure that each scenario has an explicit stimulus and response. The facilitators ensure that at least one representative scenario exists for each architectural driver listed in step 4.
> 
> _Step 6: Scenario Consolidation._ After the scenario brainstorming, similar scenarios are consolidated where reasonable. Facilitators ask stakeholders to identify those scenarios that are very similar in content. Scenarios that are similar are merged, as long as the people who proposed them agree and feel that their scenarios will not be diluted in the process. Consolidation helps to prevent votes from being spread across several scenarios that are expressing the same concern. Consolidating almost-alike scenarios assures that the underlying concern will get all of the votes it is due.
>
> _Step 7: Scenario Prioritization._ Prioritization of the scenarios is ac-complished by allocating each stakeholder a number of votes equal to 30 percent of the total number of scenarios generated after consolidation. Stakeholders can allocate any number of their votes to any scenario or combination of scenarios. The votes are counted, and the scenarios are prioritized accordingly.
>
> _Step 8: Scenario Refinement._ After the prioritization, the top scenar-ios are refined and elaborated. Facilitators help the stakeholders put the scenarios in the six-part scenario form of source-stimulus-artifact-environ-ment-response-response measure that we described in Chapter 4. As the scenarios are refined, issues surrounding their satisfaction will emerge. These are also recorded. Step 8 lasts as long as time and resources allow.

[^1]: This material was adapted from [Barbacci 03].
