16.5 Tying the Methods Together
===

How should you employ requirements documents, stakeholder interviews, Qual-ity Attribute Workshops, PALM, and utility trees in concert with each other?

As for most complex questions, the answer to this one is “It depends.” If you have a requirements process that gathers, identifies, and prioritizes ASRs, then use that and consider yourself lucky.

If you feel your requirements fall short of this ideal state, then you can bring to bear one or more of the other approaches. For example, if nobody has captured the business goals behind the system you’re building, then a PALM exercise would be a good way to ensure that those goals are represented in the system’s ASRs.

If you feel that important stakeholders have been overlooked in the require-ments-gathering process, then it will probably behoove you to capture their con-cerns through interviews. A Quality Attribute Workshop is a structured method to do that and capture their input.

Building a utility tree is a good way to capture ASRs along with their priori-tization—something that many requirements processes overlook.

Finally, you can blend all the methods together: PALM makes an excellent “subroutine call” from a Quality Attribute Workshop for the step that asks about business goals, and a quality attribute utility tree makes an excellent repository for the scenarios that are the workshop’s output.

It is unlikely, however, that your project will have the time and resources to support this do-it-all approach. Better to pick the approach that fills in the biggest gap in your existing requirements: stakeholder representation, business goal man-ifestation, or ASR prioritization.
