16.8 Discussion Questions 问题讨论
===

1. Interview representative stakeholders for your business’s or university’s ex-pense recovery system. Capture the business goals that are motivating the sys-tem. Use the seven-part business goal scenario outline given in Section 16.3.
2. Draw a relation between the business goals you uncovered for the previous question and ASRs.
3. Consider an automated teller machine (ATM) system. Attempt to apply the 11 categories of business goals to that system and infer what goals might have been held by various stakeholders involved in its development.
4. Create a utility tree for the ATM system above. (Interview some of your friends and colleagues if you like, to have them contribute quality attribute considerations and scenarios.) Consider a minimum of four different quali-ty attributes. Ensure that the scenarios that you create at the leaf nodes have explicit responses and response measures.
5. Restructure the utility tree given in Section 16.4 using stakeholder roles as the organizing principle. What are the benefits and drawbacks of the two representations?
6. Find a software requirements specification that you consider to be of high quality. Using colored pens (real ones if the document is printed, virtual ones if the document is online), color red all the material that you find com-pletely irrelevant to a software architecture for that system. Color yellow all of the material that you think might be relevant, but not without further dis-cussion and elaboration. Color green all of the material that you are certain is architecturally significant. When you’re done, every part of the document that’s not white space should be red, yellow, or green. Approximately what percentage of each color did your document end up being? Do the results surprise you?
