17.4 Summary 小结
===

The Attribute-Driven Design method is an application of the generate-and-test philosophy. It keeps the number of requirements that must be satisfied to a hu-manly achievable quantity. ADD is an iterative method that, at each iteration, helps the architect to do the following:

* Choose an element of the system to design.
* Marshal all the architecturally significant requirements for the chosen element.
* Create and test a design for that chosen element.

The output of ADD is not an architecture complete in every detail, but an ar-chitecture in which the main design approaches have been selected and validated. It produces a “workable” architecture early and quickly, one that can be given to other project teams so they can begin their work while the architect or architec-ture team continues to elaborate and refine.

ADD is a five-step method:

1. Choose the element of the system to design. For green-field designs, the “part” to begin with is simply the entire system. For designs that are already partially completed (either by external constraints or by previous iterations through ADD), the part is an element that is not yet designed. Choosing the next element can proceed in a breadth-first, depth-first, or mixed manner.
2. Identify the ASRs for the chosen element.
3. Generate a design solution for the chosen element, using design collateral such as existing systems, frameworks, patterns and tactics, and the design checklists from Chapters 5–11.
4. Verify and refine requirements and generate input for the next iteration. Either the design in step 3 will satisfy all of the chosen element’s ASRs or it won’t. If it doesn’t, then either they can be allocated to elements that will be elaborated in future iterations of ADD, or the existing design is inad-equate and we must backtrack. Furthermore, non-ASR requirements will either be satisfied, allocated to children, or indicated as not achievable.
5. Repeat steps 1–4 until all the ASRs have been satisfied, or until the archi-tecture has been elaborated sufficiently for the implementers to use it.
