18.13 discussion Questions 问题讨论
===

1. Go to the website of your favorite open source system. On the site, look for the architectural documentation for that system. What is there? What is missing? How would this affect your ability to contribute code to this project?

2. Banks are justifiably cautious about security. Sketch the documentation you would need for an automatic teller machine (ATM) in order to reason about its security architecture.

3. Suppose your company has just purchased another company and that you have been given the task of merging a system in your company with a similar system in the other company. What views of the other system’s architecture would you like to see and why? Would you ask for the same views of both systems?

4. When would you choose to document behavior using trace models or using comprehensive models? What value do you get and what effort is required for each of them?

5. How much of a project’s budget would you devote to software architecture documentation? Why? How would you measure the cost and the benefit?

6. Antony Tang, an architect and one of the reviewers of this book, says that he has used a development view—a kind of quality view—that describes how the software should be developed in relation to the use of tools and development workflows, the use of standard library routines such as for exception handling, some coding conventions and standards, and some testing and deployment conventions. Sketch a definition of a development view.
