18.1 Uses and Audiences for Architecture Documentation 架构文档的用途和受众
===

Architecture documentation must serve varied purposes. It should be sufficiently transparent and accessible to be quickly understood by new employees. It should be sufficiently concrete to serve as a blueprint for construction. It should have enough information to serve as a basis for analysis.

Architecture documentation is both prescriptive and descriptive. For some audiences, it prescribes what should be true, placing constraints on decisions yet to be made. For other audiences, it describes what is true, recounting decisions already made about a system’s design.

The best architecture documentation for, say, performance analysis may well be different from the best architecture documentation we would wish to hand to an implementer. And both of these will be different from what we put in a new hire’s “welcome aboard” package or a briefing we put together for an executive. When planning and reviewing documentation, you need to ensure support for all the relevant needs.

We can see that many different kinds of people are going to have a vested interest in an architecture document. They hope and expect that the architecture document will help them do their respective jobs. Understanding their uses of architecture documentation is essential, as those uses determine the important information to capture.

Fundamentally, architecture documentation has three uses:

1. _Architecture documentation serves as a means of education._ The educational use consists of introducing people to the system. The people may be new members of the team, external analysts, or even a new architect. In many cases, the “new” person is the customer to whom you’re showing your solution for the first time, a presentation you hope will result in funding or go-ahead approval.

2. _Architecture documentation serves as a primary vehicle for communication among stakeholders._ An architecture’s precise use as a communication vehicle depends on which stakeholders are doing the communicating.

   Perhaps one of the most avid consumers of architecture documentation is none other than the architect in the project’s future. The future architect may be the same person or may be a replacement, but in either case he or she is guaranteed to have an enormous stake in the documentation. New architects are interested in learning how their predecessors tackled the difficult issues of the system and why particular decisions were made. Even if the future architect is the same person, he or she will use the documentation as a repository of thought, a storehouse of design decisions too numerous and hopelessly intertwined to ever be reproducible from memory alone. See the sidebar “Schmucks and Jerks.”

3. _Architecture documentation serves as the basis for system analysis and construction._ Architecture tells implementers what to implement. Each module has interfaces that must be provided and uses interfaces from other modules. Not only does this provide instructions about the provided and used interfaces, but it also determines with what other teams the development team for the module must communicate.

   During development, an architecture can be very complex, with many issues left to resolve. Documentation can serve as a receptacle for registering and communicating these issues that might otherwise be overlooked.

   For those interested in the ability of the design to meet the system’s quality objectives, the architecture documentation serves as the fodder for evaluation. It must contain the information necessary to evaluate a variety of attributes, such as security, performance, usability, availability, and modifiability.

   For system builders who use automatic code-generation tools, the documentation may incorporate the models used for generation. These models provide guidance to those who wish to understand the behavior of the module in more detail than is normally documented but in less detail than examining the code would provide.
