18.12 For Further Reading 进一步阅读
===

Documenting Software Architectures (second edition) [Clements 10a] is a comprehensive treatment of the Views and Beyond approach. It describes a multitude of different views and notations for them. It also describes how to package the documentation into a coherent whole.

ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011 (“eye-so-forty-two-ten” for short) is the ISO (and IEEE) standard [ISO 11] Systems and software engineering—Architecture description. The first edition of that standard, IEEE Std. 1471-2000, was developed by an IEEE working group drawing on experience from industry, academia, and other standards bodies between 1995 and 2000. ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010 is centered on two key ideas: a conceptual framework for architecture description and a statement of what information must be found in any ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010-com-pliant architecture description, using multiple viewpoints driven by stakeholders’ concerns.

Under ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010, as in the Views and Beyond approach, views have a central role in documenting software architecture. The architecture description of a system includes one or more views.

If you want to use the Views and Beyond approach to produce an ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010-compliant architecture document, you certainly can. The main additional obligation is to choose and document a set of viewpoints, identifying the stakeholders, their concerns, and the elements catalog for each view, and (to a lesser degree) address ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010’s other required information content.

AADL is an SAE standard. The SAE is an organization for engineering professionals in the aerospace, automotive, and commercial vehicle industries. The website for the AADL standard is at www.aadl.info.

SDL is a notation used in the telecom industry. It is targeted at describing the behavior of reactive and distributed systems in general and telecom systems in particular. A real-time version of SDL can be found at www.sdl-rt.org/standard/V2.2/pdf/SDL-RT.pdf.

UML 2.0 added several features specifically to allow architecture to be modeled, such as ports. It is managed by the Object Management Group and can be found at www.omg.org/spec/UML/.
