18.8 Architecture Documentation and Quality Attributes
===

If architecture is largely about the achievement of quality attributes and if one of the main uses of architecture documentation is to serve as a basis for analysis (to make sure the architecture will achieve its required quality attributes), where do quality attributes show up in the documentation? Short of a full-fledged quality view (see page 340), there are five major ways:

1. Any major design approach (such as an architecture pattern) will have quality attribute properties associated with it. Client-server is good for scalability, layering is good for portability, an information-hiding-based decomposition is good for modifiability, services are good for interoperability, and so forth. Explaining the choice of approach is likely to include a discussion about the satisfaction of quality attribute requirements and tradeoffs incurred. Look for the place in the documentation where such an explanation occurs. In our approach, we call that rationale.
2. Individual architectural elements that provide a service often have quality attribute bounds assigned to them. Consumers of the services need to know how fast, secure, or reliable those services are. These quality attribute bounds are defined in the interface documentation for the elements, sometimes in the form of a service-level agreement. Or they may simply be recorded as properties that the elements exhibit.
3. Quality attributes often impart a “language” of things that you would look for. Security involves security levels, authenticated users, audit trails, firewalls, and the like. Performance brings to mind buffer capacities, deadlines, periods, event rates and distributions, clocks and timers, and so on. Availability conjures up mean time between failure, failover mechanisms, primary and secondary functionality, critical and noncritical processes, and redundant elements. Someone fluent in the “language” of a quality attribute can search for the kinds of architectural elements (and properties of those elements) that were put in place precisely to satisfy that quality attribute requirement.
4. Architecture documentation often contains a mapping to requirements that shows how requirements (including quality attribute requirements) are satisfied. If your requirements document establishes a requirement for availability, for instance, then you should be able to look it up by name or reference in your architecture document to see the places where that requirement is satisfied.
5. Every quality attribute requirement will have a constituency of stakeholders who want to know that it is going to be satisfied. For these stakeholders, the architect should provide a special place in the documentation’s introduction that either provides what the stakeholder is looking for, or tells the stakeholder where in the document to find it. It would say something like this: “If you are a performance analyst, you should pay attention to the processes and threads and their properties (defined [here]), and their deployment on the underlying hardware platform (defined [here]).” In our documentation approach, we put this here’s-what-you’re-looking-for information in a section called the documentation roadmap.
