18 Documenting Software Architecture
===

_If it is not written down, it does not exist._  
—Philippe Kruchten

Even the best architecture, the most perfectly suited for the job, will be essentially useless if the people who need to use it do not know what it is; cannot understand it well enough to use, build, or modify it; or (worst of all) misunderstand it and apply it incorrectly. And all of the effort, analysis, hard work, and insightful design on the part of the architecture team will have been wasted. They might as well have gone on vacation for all the good their architecture will do.

Creating an architecture isn’t enough. It has to be communicated in a way to let its stakeholders use it properly to do their jobs. If you go to the trouble of creating a strong architecture, one that you expect to stand the test of time, then you must go to the trouble of describing it in enough detail, without ambiguity, and organizing it so that others can quickly find and update needed information.

Documentation speaks for the architect. It speaks for the architect today, when the architect should be doing other things besides answering a hundred questions about the architecture. And it speaks for the architect tomorrow, when he or she has left the project and now someone else is in charge of its evolution and maintenance.

The sad truth is that architectural documentation today, if it is done at all, is often treated as an afterthought, something people do because they have to. Maybe a contract requires it. Maybe a customer demands it. Maybe a company’s standard process calls for it. In fact, these may all be legitimate reasons. But none of them are compelling enough to produce high-quality documentation. Why should the architect spend valuable time and energy just so a manager can check off a deliverable?

The best architects produce good documentation not because it’s “required” but because they see that it is essential to the matter at hand—producing a high-quality product, predictably and with as little rework as possible. They see their immediate stakeholders as the people most intimately involved in this undertaking: developers, deployers, testers, and analysts.

But architects also see documentation as delivering value to themselves. Documentation serves as the receptacle to hold the results of major design decisions as they are confirmed. A well-thought-out documentation scheme can make the process of design go much more smoothly and systematically. Documentation helps the architect(s) reason about the architecture design and communicate it while the architecting is in progress, whether in a six-month design phase or a six-day Agile sprint.