19.5 Discussion Questions 问题讨论
===

1. In a distributed system each computer will have its own clock. It is difficult to perfectly synchronize those clocks. How will this complicate making performance measures of distributed systems? How would you go about testing that the performance of a particular system activity is adequate?
2. Plan and implement a modification to a module. Ask your colleagues to do the same modification independently. Now compare your results to those of your colleagues. What is the mean and the standard deviation for the time it takes to make that modification?
3. List some of the reasons why an architecture and a code base inevitably drift apart. What processes and tools might address this gap? What are their costs and benefits?
4. Most user interface frameworks work by capturing events from the user and by establishing callbacks or hooks to application-specific functionality. What limitations do these architectural assumptions impose on the rest of the system?
5. Consider building a test harness for a large system. What quality attributes should this harness exhibit? Create scenarios to concretize each of the quality attributes.
6. Testing requires the presence of a test oracle, which determines the success (or failure) of a test. For scalability reasons, the oracle must be automatic. How can you ensure that your oracle is correct? How do you ensure that its performance will scale appropriately? What process would you use to record and fix faults in the testing infrastructure?
7. In embedded systems faults often occur “in the field” and it is difficult to capture and replicate the state of the system that led to its failure. What architectural mechanisms might you use to solve this problem?
8. In integration testing it is a bad idea to integrate everything all at once (big bang integration). How would you use architecture to help you plan integration increments?
