20 Architecture Reconstruction, and Conformance 架构重构和一致性
===

_It was six men of Indostan / To learning much inclined, Who went to see the Elephant / (Though all of them were blind), That each by observation / Might satisfy his mind._

_The First approach’d the Elephant, / And happening to fall Against his broad and sturdy side, / At once began to bawl: “God bless me! but the Elephant / Is very like a wall!”_

_The Second, feeling of the tusk, / Cried, — “Ho! what have we here So very round and smooth and sharp? / To me ’tis mighty clear This wonder of an Elephant / Is very like a spear!”_

_The Third approached the animal, / And happening to take The squirming trunk within his hands, / Thus boldly up and spake: “I see,” quoth he, “the Elephant / Is very like a snake!”_

_The Fourth reached out his eager hand, / And felt about the knee. “What most this wondrous beast is like / Is mighty plain,” quoth he, “’Tis clear enough the Elephant / Is very like a tree!”_

_The Fifth, who chanced to touch the ear, / Said: “E’en the blindest man Can tell what this resembles most; / Deny the fact who can, This marvel of an Elephant / Is very like a fan!”_

_The Sixth no sooner had begun / About the beast to grope, Then, seizing on the swinging tail / That fell within his scope, “I see,” quoth he, “the Elephant / Is very like a rope!”_

_And so these men of Indostan / Disputed loud and long, Each in his own opinion / Exceeding stiff and strong, Though each was partly in the right, / And all were in the wrong!_

—“The Blind Men and the Elephant,” by John Godfrey Saxe

Throughout this book we have treated architecture as something largely under your control and shown how to make architectural decisions to achieve the goals and requirements in place for a system under development. But there is another side to the picture. Suppose you have been given responsibility for a system that already exists, but you do not know its architecture. Perhaps the architecture was never recorded by the original developers, now long gone. Perhaps it was recorded but the documentation has been lost. Or perhaps it was recorded but the documentation is no longer synchronized with the system after a series of changes. How do you maintain such a system? How do you manage its evolution to maintain the quality attributes that its architecture (whatever it may be) has provided for us?

This chapter surveys techniques that allow an analyst to build, maintain, and understand a representation of an existing architecture. This is a process of reverse engineering, typically called architecture reconstruction. Architecture reconstruction is used, by the architect, for two main purposes:

* To document an architecture where the documentation never existed or where it has become hopelessly out of date
* To ensure conformance between the as-built architecture and the as-designed architecture.

In architecture reconstruction, the “as-built” architecture of an implemented system is reverse-engineered from existing system artifacts.

When a system is initially developed, its architectural elements are mapped to specific implementation elements: functions, classes, files, objects, and so forth. This is forward engineering. When we reconstruct those architectural elements, we need to apply the inverses of the original mappings. But how do we go about determining these mappings? One way is to use automated and semiautomated extraction tools; the second way is to probe the original design intent of the architect. Typically we use a combination of both techniques in reconstructing an architecture.

In practice, architecture reconstruction is a tool-intensive activity. Tools extract information about the system, typically by scouring the source code, but they may also analyze other artifacts as well, such as build scripts or traces from running systems. But architectures are abstractions—they can not be seen in the low-level implementation details, the programming constructs, of most systems. So we need tools that aid in building and aggregating the abstractions that we need, as architects, on top of the ground facts that we develop, as developers. If our tools are usable and accurate, the end result is an architectural representation that aids the architect in reasoning about the system. Of course, if the original architecture and its implementation are “spaghetti,” the reconstruction will faithfully expose this lack of organization.

Architecture reconstruction tools are not, however, a panacea. In some cases, it may not be possible to generate a useful architectural representation. Furthermore, not all aspects of architecture are easy to automatically extract. Consider this: there is no programming language construct in any major programming language for “layer” or “connector” or other architectural elements; we can’t simply pick these out of a source code file. Similarly, architectural patterns, if used, are typically not explicitly documented in code.

Architecture reconstruction is an interpretive, interactive, and iterative process involving many activities; it is not automatic. It requires the skills and attention of both the reverse-engineering expert and, in the best case, the architect (or someone who has substantial knowledge of the architecture). And whether the reconstruction is successful or not, there is a price to pay: the tools come with a learning curve that requires time to climb.
