20.6 Guidelines 指南
===

The following are a set of guidelines for the reconstruction process:

* Have a goal and a set of objectives or questions in mind before undertaking an architecture reconstruction project. In the absence of these, a lot of effort could be spent on extracting information and generating architecture views that may not be helpful or serve any useful purpose.
* Obtain some representation, however coarse, of the system before beginning the detailed reconstruction process. This representation serves several purposes, including the following:
  * It identifies what information needs to be extracted from the system.
  * It guides the reconstructor in determining what to look for in the architecture and what views to generate.
  Identifying layers is a good place to start.
* In many cases, the existing documentation for a system may not accurately reflect the system as it is implemented. Therefore it may be necessary to disregard the existing documentation and use it only to generate the high-level views of the system, because it should give an indication of the high-level concepts.
* Tools can support the reconstruction effort and shorten the reconstruction process, but they cannot do an entire reconstruction effort automatically. The work involved in the effort requires the involvement of people (architects, maintainers, and developers) who are familiar with the system. It is important to get these people involved in the effort at an early stage as it helps the reconstructor get a better understanding of the system being reconstructed.
