20.9 Discussion Questions 问题讨论
===

1. Suppose that for a given system you wanted to extract the architectural structures (as discussed in Chapter 1) listed in the table rows below. For each row, fill in each column to appraise each strategy listed in the columns. “VH” (very high) means the strategy would be very effective at extracting this structure; “VL” means it would be very ineffective; “H,” M,” and “L” have the obvious in-between values.

. | . | . | Reconstruction Strategies | . 
---|---|---|---|---
. | Architectural Structures Interviewing experts on the system | Analyzing Structure of source code files | Static analysis of source code | Dynamic analysis of system’s execution
Module structures | Decomposition | . | . | .
. | Uses | . | . | .
. | Layers | . | . | .
. | Class | . | . | .
. | Data model | . | . | . 
C&C structures | Service (for SOA systems) | . | . | .
. | Concurrency | . | . | . 
Allocation structures | Deployment | . | . | .
. | Implementation | . | . | .
. | Work assignment | . | . | .

2. Recall that in layered systems, the relationship among layers is _allowed to use_. Also recall that it is possible for one piece of software to use another piece without actually calling it—for example, by depending on it leaving some shared resource in a usable state. Does this interpretation change your answer above for the “Uses” and “Layers” structures?
3. What inferences can you make about a system’s module structures from examining a set of behavioral traces gathered dynamically?
4. Suppose you believe that the architecture for a system follows a broker pattern. What information would you want to extract from the source code to confirm or refute this hypothesis? What behavioral or interaction pattern would you expect to observe at runtime?
5. Suppose you hypothesize that a system makes use of particular tactics to achieve a particular quality attribute. Fill in the columns of the table below to show how you would go about verifying your hypothesis. (Begin by filling in column 1 with a particular tactic for the named quality attribute.)

- | Reconstruction Strategies | - | - | - 
---|---|---|---|---
Tactics for… | Interviewing experts on the system | Analyzing structure of source code files | Static analysis of source code | Dynamic analysis of system’s execution
Availability | 
Interoperability |
Modifiability |
Performance |
Security |
Testability |
Usability | 
6. Suppose you want to confirm that developers and maintainers had remained faithful to an architecture over the lifetime of the system. Describe the reconstruction and/or auditing processes you would undertake.
