21.3 Lightweight Architecture Evaluation
===

Although we attempt to use time in an ATAM exercise as efficiently as possible, it remains a substantial undertaking. It requires some 20 to 30 person-days of effort from an evaluation team, plus even more for the architect and stakeholders. Investing this amount of time only makes sense on a large and costly project, where the risks of making a major mistake in the architecture are unacceptable.

For this reason, we have developed a Lightweight Architecture Evaluation method, based on the ATAM, for smaller, less risky projects. A Lightweight Architecture Evaluation exercise may take place in a single day, or even a half-day meeting. It may be carried out entirely by members internal to the organization. Of course this lower level of scrutiny and objectivity may not probe the architecture as deeply, but this is a cost/benefit tradeoff that is entirely appropriate for many projects.

Because the participants are all internal to the organization and fewer in number than for the ATAM, giving everyone their say and achieving a shared understanding takes much less time. Hence the steps and phases of a Lightweight Architecture Evaluation can be carried out more quickly. A suggested schedule for phases 1 and 2 is shown in Table 21.4.

TABLE 21.4 A Typical Agenda for Lightweight Architecture Evaluation

Step | Time Allotted | Notes
---|---|---
1: Present the ATAM | 0 hrs | The participants are familiar with the process. This step may be omitted.
2: Present Business Drivers | 0.25 hrs | The participants are expected to understand the system and its business goals and their priorities. Fifteen minutes is allocated for a brief review to ensure that these are fresh in everyone’s mind and that there are no surprises.
3: Present Architecture | 0.5 hrs | Again, all participants are expected to be familiar with the system and so a brief overview of the architecture, using at least module and C&C views, is presented and 1 to 2 scenarios are traced through these views.
4: Identify Architectural Approaches | 0.25 hrs | The architecture approaches for specific quality attribute concerns are identified by the architect. This may be done as a portion of step 3.
5: Generate Quality Attribute Utility Tree | Variable 0.5 hrs – 1.5 hrs | Scenarios might exist: part of previous evals, part of design, part of requirements elicitation. If you’ve got ’em, use ’em and make them into a tree. Half hour. Otherwise, it will take longer. A utility tree should already exist; the team reviews the existing tree and updates it, if needed, with new scenarios, new response goals, or new scenario priorities and risk assessments.
6: Analyze Architectural Approaches | 2–3 hrs | This step—mapping the highly ranked scenarios onto the architecture—consumes the bulk of the time and can be expanded or contracted as needed.
7: Brainstorm and Prioritize Scenarios | 0 hrs | This step can be omitted as the assembled (internal) stakeholders are expected to contribute scenarios expressing their concerns in step 5.
8: Analyze Architectural Approaches | 0 hrs | This step is also omitted, since all analysis is done in step 6.
9: Present Results | 0.5 hrs | At the end of an evaluation, the team reviews the existing and newly discovered risks, non-risks, sensitivities, and tradeoffs and discusses whether any new risk themes have arisen.
TOTAL | 4–6 hrs | 

There is no final report, but (as in the regular ATAM) a scribe is responsible for capturing results, which can then be distributed and serve as the basis for risk remediation.

An entire Lightweight Architecture Evaluation can be prosecuted in less than a day—perhaps an afternoon. The results will depend on how well the assembled team understands the goals of the method, the techniques of the method, and the system itself. The evaluation team, being internal, is typically not objective, and this may compromise the value of its results—one tends to hear fewer new ideas and fewer dissenting opinions. But this version of evaluation is inexpensive, easy to convene, and relatively low ceremony, so it can be quickly deployed whenever a project wants an architecture quality assurance sanity check.
