22.3 Implementing
===

During the implementation phase of a project, the project manager and architect have a series of decisions to make. In this section we discuss those involving tradeoffs, incremental development, and managing risk.

# Tradeoffs

From the project manager’s perspective, tradeoffs are between quality, schedule, functionality, and cost. These are the aspects of the project that are important to the external stakeholders, and the external stakeholders are the project manager’s constituency. Which of these aspects is most important depends on the project context, and one of the project manager’s major responsibilities is to make this determination.

Over time, there is always new functionality that someone wants to have added to the project. Frequently these requests come from the marketing department. It is important that the consequences of these new requirements, in terms of cost and schedule, be communicated to all concerned stakeholders. This is an area where the project manager and the architect must cooperate. What appear to be small requirements changes from an outsider’s perspective can, at times, require major modifications to the architecture and consequently delay a project significantly.

The project manager’s first response to creeping functionality is to resist it. Acting as a gatekeeper for the project and shielding it from distractions is a portion of the job description. One technique that is frequently used to manage change is a change control board. Bureaucracy can, at times, be your friend. Change control boards are committees set up for the purpose of managing change within a project. The original architecture team members are good candidates to sit on the change control board. Before changing an interface, for example, the impact on those modules that depend on the interface needs to be considered.

Any change to the architecture will incur costs, and it is the architect’s responsibility to be the gatekeeper for such changes. A change in the architecture implies changes in code, changes in the architecture documentation, and perhaps changes in build-time tools that enforce architectural conformance.

Documentation is especially important in distributed development. Co-lo-cated teams have a variety of informal coordination possibilities, such as going to the next office or meeting in the coffee room or the hall. Remote teams do not have these informal mechanisms and so must rely on more formal mechanisms such as documentation; team members must have the initiative to talk to each other when doubts arise. One company mounted a webcam on each developer’s desktop to facilitate personal communication.

# Incremental Development

Recall that the software development plan lays out the overall schedule. Every six to eight weeks a new release should be available and the specifics of the next release are decided. Forty percent of a typical project’s effort is devoted to testing. This means that testing should begin as soon as possible. Testing for a release can begin once the forward development has begun on the next release. The schedule also has to accommodate repairing the faults uncovered by the testing. This leads to a release being in one of three states:
1. _Planning_. This occurs toward the end of the prior development release. Enough of the prior release must be completed to understand what will be unfinished in that release and must be carried forward to the next one. At this stage, the software development plan is updated.
2. _Development_. The planned release is coded. We will discuss below how the project manager and architect track progress on the release. Daily builds and automated testing can give some insight into problems during development.
3. _Test and repair_. The release is tested through exercise of the test plan. In Chapter 19 we described how the architecture can inform the test plan and even obviate the need for certain types of testing. The problems found during test are repaired or are carried forward to the next release. 

# Tracking Progress

The project manager can track progress through personal contact with developers (this tends to not scale up well), formal status meetings, metrics, and risk management. Metrics will be discussed in the next section. Personal contact involves checking with key personnel individually to determine progress. These are one-on-one meetings, either scheduled or unscheduled.

Meetings, in general, are either status or working meetings. The two types of meetings should not be mixed. In a status meeting, various teams report on progress. This allows for communication among the teams. Issues raised at status meetings should be resolved outside of these meetings—either by individuals or by separately scheduled working meetings. When an issue is raised at a status meeting, a person should be assigned to be responsible for the resolution of that issue.

Meetings are expensive. Holding effective meetings is an important skill for a manager, whether the project manager or the architect. Meetings should have written agendas that are circulated before the meetings begin, attendees should be expected to have done some prework for the meeting (such as read-ahead), and only essential individuals should attend.

One of the outputs of status meetings is a set of risks. A risk is a potential problem together with the consequences if it occurs. The likelihood of the risk occurring should also be recorded. Risks are also raised at reviews. We have discussed architecture evaluation, and it is important from a project management perspective that reviews are included in the schedule. These can be code reviews, architecture reviews, or requirements reviews. Risks are also raised by developers. They are the ones who have the best perspective on potential problems at the implementation level. Architecture evaluation is also important because it is a source of discovering risks.

The project manager must prioritize the risks, frequently with the assistance of the architect, and, for the most serious risks, develop a mitigation strategy. Mitigating risks is also a cost, and so implementing the strategy to reduce a risk depends on its priority, likelihood of occurrence, and cost if it does occur.
