22.4 Measuring 测量
===

Metrics are an important tool for project managers. They enable the manager to have an objective basis both for their own decision making and for reporting to upper management on the progress of the project.

Metrics can be global—pertaining to the whole project—or they may depend on a particular phase of the project. Another important class of metrics is “cost to complete.” We discuss each of these below.

# Global Metrics

Global metrics aid the project manager in obtaining an overall sense of the project and tracking its progress over time. All global metrics should be updated from time to time as the project proceeds.

First, the project manager needs a measure of project size. The three most common measures of project size are lines of code, function points, and size of the test suite. None of these is completely satisfactory as a predictor of cost or effort, but these are the most commonly used size metrics in practice.

Schedule deviation is another global metric. Schedule deviation is measured by taking the difference between the planned work time and the actual work time. Once time has passed, it can never be recovered. If a project falls behind in its schedule, a tradeoff must be made between the aspects we mentioned before: schedule, quality, functionality, and cost. As the project proceeds, schedule deviation indicates a failure of estimation or an unforeseen occurrence. By drilling down in this metric and discovering which teams are slipping, the project manager can decide to reallocate resources, if necessary.

Developer productivity is another metric that the project manager can track. The project manager should look for anomalies in the productivity of the developers. An anomaly indicates a potential problem that should be investigated: perhaps a developer is inadequately trained for a task, or perhaps the task was improperly estimated. Earned value management is one technique for measuring the productivity of developers.

Finally, defects should be tracked. Again, anomalies in the number of defects discovered over time indicate a potential problem that should be investigated. Not only defects but technical debt should be tracked as well (see Chapter 15).

All of these measures have both a historical basis and a project basis. The historical basis is used to make the initial estimates and then the project basis is used for ongoing management activities.

# Phase Metrics and Costs to Complete

Open issues should be kept for each phase. For example, until a design is complete, there are always open issues. These should be tracked and additional resources allocated if they are not resolved in a timely fashion. Risks represent open issues that should be tracked, as does the project backlog.

Unmitigated risks from reviews are treated in a similar fashion. We have already discussed risk management, but one item a project manager can report to upper management is the number of high-priority risks and the status of their mitigation.

Costs to complete is a bottom-up measure that derives from the bottom-up schedule. Once the various pieces of the architecture have been assigned to teams, then the teams take ownership of their schedule and the cost to complete their pieces.
