22.5 Governance 控制
===

Up to this point, we have maintained a focus in this chapter. We have focused on the project manager as the embodiment of the project and have not discussed the external forces that act on the project manager. The topic of governance deals directly with these other forces. The Open Group defines architecture governance as “the practice and orientation by which enterprise architectures and other architectures are managed and controlled.” Implicit in this definition is the idea that the project—which is the focus of this book—exists in an organizational context. This context will mediate the interactions of the system being constructed with the other systems in the organization.

The Open Group goes on to identify four items as responsibilities of a governance board:

* Implementing a system of controls over the creation and monitoring of all architectural components and activities, to ensure the effective introduction, implementation, and evolution of architectures within the organization 
* Implementing a system to ensure compliance with internal and external standards and regulatory obligations
* Establishing processes that support effective management of the above processes within agreed parameters
* Developing practices that ensure accountability to a clearly identified stakeholder community, both inside and outside the organization 

Note the emphasis on processes and practices. Maintaining an effective governance process without excessive overhead is a line that is difficult to maintain for an organization.

The problem comes about because each system that exists in an enterprise has its own stakeholders and its own internal governance processes. Creating a system that utilizes a collection of other systems raises the issue of who is in control.

Consider the following example. Company A has a collection of products that cover different portions of a manufacturing facility. One collection of systems manages the manufacturing process, another manages the processes by which various portions of the end product are integrated, and a third collection manages the enterprise. Each of these collections of systems has its own set of customers.

Now suppose that the board of directors wishes to market the collection as an end-to-end solution for a manufacturing facility. It further turns out that the systems that manage the manufacturing process have a 6-month release cycle because the technology is changing quickly in this area. The systems that manage the integration process have a 9-month release cycle because they are based on a widely used commercial product with a 9-month release cycle. The enterprise systems have a 12-month release cycle because they are based on an organization’s fiscal year and reflect tax and regulatory changes that are likely to occur on fiscal year boundaries. Table 22.2 shows these schedules beginning at date 0.

What should the release schedule be for the combined end-to-end solution? Recall that each of these sets of products has reasons for their release schedule and each has its own set of customers who will not be receptive to changes in the release schedule. This is typical of the sort of problem that a governance committee deals with.

TABLE 22.2 Release Schedules of Different Types of Products

Manufacturing Process Control | Integration Process Control | Enterprise Management
---|---|---
Version 1—date 0 | Version 1—date 0 | Version 1—date 0
Version 2—date 6 months | Version 2—date 9 months | Version 2—date 12 months
Version 3—date 12 months | Version 3—date 18 months | Version 3—date 24 months
