22 Management and Governance
===

_How does a project get to be a year behind schedule? One day at a time._
—Fred Brooks

In this chapter we deal with those aspects of project management and governance that are important for an architect to know. The project manager is the person with whom you, as the architect, must work most closely, from an organizational perspective, and consequently it is important for you to have an understanding of the project manager’s problems and the techniques available to solve those problems. We will deal with project management from the perspectives of planning, organizing, implementing, and measuring. We will also discuss various governance issues associated with architecture.

In this chapter, we advocate a middleweight approach to architecture. It has the following aspects:

* Design the software architecture
* Use the architecture to develop realistic schedules
* Use incremental development to get to market quickly

Architecture is most useful in medium- to large-scale projects—projects that typically have multiple teams, too much complexity for any individual to fully comprehend, substantial investment, and multiyear duration. For such projects the teams need to coordinate, quality attribute problems are not easily corrected, and management demands both short time to market and adequate oversight. Lightweight management methods do not provide for a framework to guide team coordination and frequently require extensive restructuring to repair quality attribute problems. Heavyweight management is usually associated with heavy oversight and a great emphasis on contractual commitments. In some contexts, this is unavoidable, but it has an inherent overhead that slows down development.
