1.1 What Software Architecture Is and What It Isn’t 软件架构的是是非非
===

There are many definitions of software architecture, easily discoverable with a web search, but the one we like is this one:

    The software architecture of a system is the set of structures needed to reason about the system, which comprise software elements, relations among them, and properties of both.

This definition stands in contrast to other definitions that talk about the system’s “early” or “major” design decisions. While it is true that many architectural decisions are made early, not all are—especially in Agile or spiral-development projects. It’s also true that very many decisions are made early that are not architectural. Also, it’s hard to look at a decision and tell whether or not it’s “major.” Sometimes only time will tell. And since writing down an architecture is one of the architect’s most important obligations, we need to know now which decisions an architecture comprises.

Structures, on the other hand, are fairly easy to identify in software, and they form a powerful tool for system design.

Let us look at some of the implications of our definition.

**Architecture Is a Set of Software Structures**

This is the first and most obvious implication of our definition. A structure is simply a set of elements held together by a relation. Software systems are composed of many structures, and no single structure holds claim to being the architecture. There are three categories of architectural structures, which will play an important role in the design, documentation, and analysis of architectures:

1. First, some structures partition systems into implementation units, which in this book we call modules. Modules are assigned specific computational responsibilities, and are the basis of work assignments for programming teams (Team A works on the database, Team B works on the business rules, Team C works on the user interface, etc.). In large projects, these elements (modules) are subdivided for assignment to subteams. For example, the database for a large enterprise resource planning (ERP) implementation might be so complex that its implementation is split into many parts. The structure that captures that decomposition is a kind of module structure, the module decomposition structure in fact. Another kind of module structure emerges as an output of object-oriented analysis and design—class diagrams. If you aggregate your modules into layers, you’ve created another (and very useful) module structure. Module structures are static structures, in that they focus on the way the system’s functionality is divided up and assigned to implementation teams.
2. Other structures are dynamic, meaning that they focus on the way the elements interact with each other at runtime to carry out the system’s functions. Suppose the system is to be built as a set of services. The services, the infrastructure they interact with, and the synchronization and interaction relations among them form another kind of structure often used to describe a system. These services are made up of (compiled from) the programs in the various implementation units that we just described. In this book we will call runtime structures component-and-connector (C&C) structures. The term component is overloaded in software engineering. In our use, a component is always a runtime entity.
3. A third kind of structure describes the mapping from software structures to the system’s organizational, developmental, installation, and execution environments. For example, modules are assigned to teams to develop, and assigned to places in a file structure for implementation, integration, and testing. Components are deployed onto hardware in order to execute. These mappings are called allocation structures.

Although software comprises an endless supply of structures, not all of them are architectural. For example, the set of lines of source code that contain the letter “z,” ordered by increasing length from shortest to longest, is a software structure. But it’s not a very interesting one, nor is it architectural. A structure is architectural if it supports reasoning about the system and the system’s properties. The reasoning should be about an attribute of the system that is important to some stakeholder. These include functionality achieved by the system, the availability of the system in the face of faults, the difficulty of making specific changes to the system, the responsiveness of the system to user requests, and many others. We will spend a great deal of time in this book on the relationship between architecture and quality attributes like these.

Thus, the set of architectural structures is not fixed or limited. What is architectural is what is useful in your context for your system.

**Architecture Is an Abstraction**

Because architecture consists of structures and structures consist of elements[1] and relations, it follows that an architecture comprises software elements and how the elements relate to each other. This means that architecture specifically omits certain information about elements that is not useful for reasoning about the system—in particular, it omits information that has no ramifications outside of a single element. Thus, an architecture is foremost an abstraction of a system that selects certain details and suppresses others. In all modern systems, elements interact with each other by means of interfaces that partition details about an element into public and private parts. Architecture is concerned with the public side of this division; private details of elements—details having to do solely with internal implementation—are not architectural. Beyond just interfaces, though, the architectural abstraction lets us look at the system in terms of its elements, how they are arranged, how they interact, how they are composed, what their properties are that support our system reasoning, and so forth. This abstraction is essential to taming the complexity of a system—we simply cannot, and do not want to, deal with all of the complexity all of the time.

**Every Software System Has a Software Architecture**

Every system can be shown to comprise elements and relations among them to support some type of reasoning. In the most trivial case, a system is itself a single element—an uninteresting and probably non-useful architecture, but an architecture nevertheless.

Even though every system has an architecture, it does not necessarily follow that the architecture is known to anyone. Perhaps all of the people who designed the system are long gone, the documentation has vanished (or was never produced), the source code has been lost (or was never delivered), and all we have is the executing binary code. This reveals the difference between the architecture of a system and the representation of that architecture. Because an architecture can exist independently of its description or specification, this raises the importance of architecture documentation, which is described in Chapter 18, and architecture reconstruction, discussed in Chapter 20.

**Architecture Includes Behavior**

The behavior of each element is part of the architecture insofar as that behavior can be used to reason about the system. This behavior embodies how elements interact with each other, which is clearly part of our definition of architecture.

This tells us that box-and-line drawings that are passed off as architectures are in fact not architectures at all. When looking at the names of the boxes (database, graphical user interface, executive, etc.), a reader may well imagine the functionality and behavior of the corresponding elements. This mental image approaches an architecture, but it springs from the imagination of the observer’s mind and relies on information that is not present. This does not mean that the exact behavior and performance of every element must be documented in all circumstances—some aspects of behavior are fine-grained and below the architect’s level of concern. But to the extent that an element’s behavior influences another element or influences the acceptability of the system as a whole, this behavior must be considered, and should be documented, as part of the software architecture.

**Not All Architectures Are Good Architectures**

The definition is indifferent as to whether the architecture for a system is a good one or a bad one. An architecture may permit or preclude a system’s achievement of its behavioral, quality attribute, and life-cycle requirements. Assuming that we do not accept trial and error as the best way to choose an architecture for a system—that is, picking an architecture at random, building the system from it, and then hacking away and hoping for the best—this raises the importance of architecture design, which is treated in Chapter 17, and architecture evaluation, which we deal with in Chapter 21.

> **System and Enterprise Architectures**
>
> Two disciplines related to software architecture are system architecture and enterprise architecture. Both of these disciplines have broader concerns than software and affect software architecture through the establishment of constraints within which a software system must live. In both cases, the software architect for a system should be on the team that provides input into the decisions made about the system or the enterprise.
>
> _System architecture_
> A system’s architecture is a representation of a system in which there is a mapping of functionality onto hardware and software components, a mapping of the software architecture onto the hardware architecture, and a concern for the human interaction with these components. That is, system architecture is concerned with a total system, including hardware, software, and humans.
>
> A system architecture will determine, for example, the functionality that is assigned to different processors and the type of network that connects those processors. The software architecture on each of those processors will determine how this functionality is implemented and how the various processors interact through the exchange of messages on the network.
>
> A description of the software architecture, as it is mapped to hardware and networking components, allows reasoning about qualities such as performance and reliability. A description of the system architecture will allow reasoning about additional qualities such as power consumption, weight, and physical footprint.
>
> When a particular system is designed, there is frequently negotiation between the system architect and the software architect as to the distribution of functionality and, consequently, the constraints placed on the software architecture.
>
> _Enterprise architecture_
>
> Enterprise architecture is a description of the structure and behavior of an organization’s processes, information flow, personnel, and organizational subunits, aligned with the organization’s core goals and strategic direction. An enterprise architecture need not include information systems—clearly organizations had architectures that fit the preceding definition prior to the advent of computers—but these days, enterprise architectures for all but the smallest businesses are unthinkable without information system support. Thus, a modern enterprise architecture is concerned with how an enterprise’s software systems support the business processes and goals of the enterprise. Typically included in this set of concerns is a process for deciding which systems with which functionality should be supported by an enterprise.
>
> An enterprise architecture will specify the data model that various systems use to interact, for example. It will specify rules for how the enterprise’s systems interact with external systems.
>
> Software is only one concern of enterprise architecture. Two other common concerns addressed by enterprise architecture are how the software is used by humans to perform business processes, and the standards that determine the computational environment.
>
> Sometimes the software infrastructure that supports communication among systems and with the external world is considered a portion of the enterprise architecture; other times, this infrastructure is considered one of the systems within an enterprise. (In either case, the architecture of that infrastructure is a software architecture!) These two views will result in different management structures and spheres of influence for the individuals concerned with the infrastructure.
>
> The system and the enterprise provide environments for, and constraints on, the software architecture. The software architecture must live within the system and enterprise, and increasingly it is the focus for achieving the organization’s business goals. But all three forms of architecture share important commonalities: They are concerned with major elements taken as abstractions, the relationships among the elements, and how the elements together meet the behavioral and quality goals of the thing being built.
>
> _Are these in scope for this book? Yes! (Well, no.)_  
> System and enterprise architectures share a great deal with software architectures. All can be designed, evaluated, and documented; all answer to requirements; all are intended to satisfy stakeholders; all consist of structures, which in turn consist of elements and relationships; all have a repertoire of patterns and styles at their respective architects’ disposal; and the list goes on. So to the extent that these architectures share commonalities with software architecture, they are in the scope of this book. But like all technical disciplines, each has its own specialized vocabulary and techniques, and we won’t cover those. Copious other sources do.

[1]. In this book we use the term “element” when we mean either a module or a component, and don’t
want to distinguish.