1.3 Architectural Patterns
===

In some cases, architectural elements are composed in ways that solve particular problems. The compositions have been found useful over time, and over many different domains, and so they have been documented and disseminated. These compositions of architectural elements, called architectural patterns, provide packaged strategies for solving some of the problems facing a system.

An architectural pattern delineates the element types and their forms of interaction used in solving the problem. Patterns can be characterized according to the type of architectural elements they use. For example, a common module type pattern is this:

* _Layered pattern_. When the uses relation among software elements is strictly unidirectional, a system of layers emerges. A layer is a coherent set of related functionality. In a strictly layered structure, a layer can only use the services of the layer immediately below it. Many variations of this pattern, lessening the structural restriction, occur in practice. Layers are often designed as abstractions (virtual machines) that hide implementation specifics below from the layers above, engendering portability. Common component-and-connector type patterns are these:
* _Shared-data (or repository) pattern_. This pattern comprises components and connectors that create, store, and access persistent data. The repository usually takes the form of a (commercial) database. The connectors are protocols for managing the data, such as SQL.
* _Client-server pattern_. The components are the clients and the servers, and the connectors are protocols and messages they share among each other to carry out the system’s work. Common allocation patterns include the following:
* _Multi-tier pattern_, which describes how to distribute and allocate the components of a system in distinct subsets of hardware and software, connected by some communication medium. This pattern specializes the generic deployment (software-to-hardware allocation) structure.
* _Competence center and platform_, which are patterns that specialize a software system’s work assignment structure. In competence center, work is allocated to sites depending on the technical or domain expertise located at a site. For example, user-interface design is done at a site where usability engineering experts are located. In platform, one site is tasked with developing reusable core assets of a software product line (see Chapter 25), and other sites develop applications that use the core assets.

Architectural patterns will be investigated much further in Chapter 13.