1.5 Summary
===

The software architecture of a system is the set of structures needed to reason about the system, which comprise software elements, relations among them, and properties of both.

A structure is a set of elements and the relations among them.

A view is a representation of a coherent set of architectural elements, as written by and read by system stakeholders. A view is a representation of one or more structures.

There are three categories of structures:

* Module structures show how a system is to be structured as a set of code or data units that have to be constructed or procured.
* Component-and-connector structures show how the system is to be structured as a set of elements that have runtime behavior (components) and interactions (connectors).
* Allocation structures show how the system will relate to nonsoftware structures in its environment (such as CPUs, file systems, networks, development teams, etc.).

Structures represent the primary engineering leverage points of an architecture. Each structure brings with it the power to manipulate one or more quality attributes. They represent a powerful approach for creating the architecture (and later, for analyzing it and explaining it to its stakeholders). And as we will see in Chapter 18, the structures that the architect has chosen as engineering leverage points are also the primary candidates to choose as the basis for architecture documentation.

Every system has a software architecture, but this architecture may be documented and disseminated, or it may not be.

There is no such thing as an inherently good or bad architecture. Architectures are either more or less fit for some purpose.