1.6 For Further Reading
===

The early work of David Parnas laid much of the conceptual foundation for what became the study of software architecture. A quintessential Parnas reader would include his foundational article on information hiding [Parnas 72] as well as his works on program families [Parnas 76], the structures inherent in software systems [Parnas 74], and introduction of the uses structure to build subsets and supersets of systems [Parnas 79]. All of these papers can be found in the more easily accessible collection of his important papers [Hoffman 00].

An early paper by Perry and Wolf [Perry 92] drew an analogy between software architecture views and structures and the structures one finds in a house (plumbing, electrical, and so forth).

Software architectural patterns have been extensively catalogued in the series Pattern-Oriented Software Architecture [Buschmann 96] and others. Chapter 13 of this book also deals with architectural patterns.

Early papers on architectural views as used in industrial development projects are [Soni 95] and [Kruchten 95]. The former grew into a book [Hofmeister 00] that presents a comprehensive picture of using views in development and analysis. The latter grew into the Rational Unified Process, about which there is no shortage of references, both paper and online. A good one is [Kruchten 03].

Cristina Gacek and her colleagues discuss the process issues surrounding software architecture in [Gacek 95].

Garlan and Shaw’s seminal work on software architecture [Garlan 93] provides many excellent examples of architectural styles (a concept similar to patterns).

In [Clements 10a] you can find an extended discussion on the difference between an architectural pattern and an architectural style. (It argues that a pattern is a context-problem-solution triple; a style is simply a condensation that focuses most heavily on the solution part.)

See [Taylor 09] for a definition of software architecture based on decisions rather than on structure.