1.7 Discussion Questions
===

1. Software architecture is often compared to the architecture of buildings as a conceptual analogy. What are the strong points of that analogy? What is the correspondence in buildings to software architecture structures and views? To patterns? What are the weaknesses of the analogy? When does it break down?
2. Do the architectures you’ve been exposed to document different structures and relations like those described in this chapter? If so, which ones? If not, why not?
3. Is there a different definition of software architecture that you are familiar with? If so, compare and contrast it with the definition given in this chapter. Many definitions include considerations like “rationale” (stating the reasons why the architecture is what it is) or how the architecture will evolve over time. Do you agree or disagree that these considerations should be part of the definition of software architecture?
4. Discuss how an architecture serves as a basis for analysis. What about decision-making? What kinds of decision-making does an architecture empower?
5. What is architecture’s role in project risk reduction?
6. Find a commonly accepted definition of system architecture and discuss what it has in common with software architecture. Do the same for enterprise architecture.
7. Find a published example of an architecture. What structure or structures are shown? Given its purpose, what structure or structures should have been shown? What analysis does the architecture support? Critique it: What questions do you have that the representation does not answer?
8. Sailing ships have architectures, which means they have “structures” that lend themselves to reasoning about the ship’s performance and other quality attributes. Look up the technical definitions for barque, brig, cutter, frigate, ketch, schooner, and sloop. Propose a useful set of “structures” for distinguishing and reasoning about ship architectures.