1 What Is Software Architecture什么是软件构架
===

_Good judgment is usually the result of experience. And experience is frequently the result of bad judgment. But to learn from the experience of others requires those who have the experience to share the knowledge with those who follow._  
—Barry LePatner

Writing (on our part) and reading (on your part) a book about software architecture, which distills the experience of many people, presupposes that

1. having a software architecture is important to the successful development of a software system and
2. there is a sufficient, and sufficiently generalizable, body of knowledge about software architecture to fill up a book.

One purpose of this book is to convince you that both of these assumptions are true, and once you are convinced, give you a basic knowledge so that you can apply it yourself.

Software systems are constructed to satisfy organizations’ business goals. The architecture is a bridge between those (often abstract) business goals and the final (concrete) resulting system. While the path from abstract goals to concrete systems can be complex, the good news is that software architectures can be designed, analyzed, documented, and implemented using known techniques that will support the achievement of these business and mission goals. The complexity can be tamed, made tractable.

These, then, are the topics for this book: the design, analysis, documentation, and implementation of architectures. We will also examine the influences, principally in the form of business goals and quality attributes, which inform these activities.

In this chapter we will focus on architecture strictly from a software engineering point of view. That is, we will explore the value that a software architecture brings to a development project. (Later chapters will take a business and organizational perspective.)