2.12 Restricting the Vocabulary of Design Alternatives
===

As useful architectural patterns are collected, it becomes clear that although software elements can be combined in more or less infinite ways, there is something to be gained by voluntarily restricting ourselves to a relatively small number of choices of elements and their interactions. By doing so we minimize the design complexity of the system we are building.

A software engineer is not an artiste, whose creativity and freedom are paramount. Engineering is about discipline, and discipline comes in part by restricting the vocabulary of alternatives to proven solutions. Advantages of this approach include enhanced reuse, more regular and simpler designs that are more easily understood and communicated, more capable analysis, shorter selection time, and greater interoperability. Architectural patterns guide the architect and focus the architect on the quality attributes of interest in large part by restricting the vocabulary of design alternatives to a relatively small number.

Properties of software design follow from the choice of an architectural pattern. Those patterns that are more desirable for a particular problem should improve the implementation of the resulting design solution, perhaps by making it easier to arbitrate conflicting design constraints, by increasing insight into poorly understood design contexts, or by helping to surface inconsistencies in requirements. We will discuss architectural patterns in more detail in Chapter 13.