2.1 Inhibiting or Enabling a System’s Quality Attributes
===

Whether a system will be able to exhibit its desired (or required) quality attributes is substantially determined by its architecture.

This is such an important message that we’ve devoted all of Part 2 of this book to expounding that message in detail. Until then, keep these examples in mind as a starting point:

* If your system requires high performance, then you need to pay attention to managing the time-based behavior of elements, their use of shared resources, and the frequency and volume of inter-element communication.
* If modifiability is important, then you need to pay careful attention to assigning responsibilities to elements so that the majority of changes to the system will affect a small number of those elements. (Ideally each change will affect just a single element.)
* If your system must be highly secure, then you need to manage and protect inter-element communication and control which elements are allowed to access which information; you may also need to introduce specialized elements (such as an authorization mechanism) into the architecture.
* If you believe that scalability will be important to the success of your system, then you need to carefully localize the use of resources to facilitate introduction of higher-capacity replacements, and you must avoid hardcoding in resource assumptions or limits.
* If your projects need the ability to deliver incremental subsets of the system, then you must carefully manage intercomponent usage. 
* If you want the elements from your system to be reusable in other systems, then you need to restrict inter-element coupling, so that when you extract an element, it does not come out with too many attachments to its current environment to be useful.

The strategies for these and other quality attributes are supremely architectural. But an architecture alone cannot guarantee the functionality or quality required of a system. Poor downstream design or implementation decisions can always undermine an adequate architectural design. As we like to say (mostly in jest): The architecture giveth and the implementation taketh away. Decisions at all stages of the life cycle—from architectural design to coding and implementation—affect system quality. Therefore, quality is not completely a function of an architectural design

A good architecture is necessary, but not sufficient, to ensure quality. Achieving quality attributes must be considered throughout design, implementation, and deployment. No quality attribute is entirely dependent on design, nor is it entirely dependent on implementation or deployment. Satisfactory results are a matter of getting the big picture (architecture) as well as the details (implementation) correct.

For example, modifiability is determined by how functionality is divided and coupled (architectural) and by coding techniques within a module (nonarchitectural). Thus, a system is typically modifiable if changes involve the fewest possible number of distinct elements. In spite of having the ideal architecture, however, it is always possible to make a system difficult to modify by writing obscure, tangled code.