2.11 A llowing Incorporation of Independently Developed Components
===

Whereas earlier software paradigms have focused on programming as the prime activity, with progress measured in lines of code, architecture-based development often focuses on composing or assembling elements that are likely to have been developed separately, even independently, from each other. This composition is possible because the architecture defines the elements that can be incorporated into the system. The architecture constrains possible replacements (or additions) according to how they interact with their environment, how they receive and relinquish control, what data they consume and produce, how they access data, and what protocols they use for communication and resource sharing.

In 1793, Eli Whitney’s mass production of muskets, based on the principle of interchangeable parts, signaled the dawn of the industrial age. In the days before physical measurements were reliable, manufacturing interchangeable parts was a daunting notion. Today in software, until abstractions can be reliably delimited, the notion of structural interchangeability is just as daunting and just as significant.

Commercial off-the-shelf components, open source software, publicly available apps, and networked services are all modern-day software instantiations of Whitney’s basic idea. Whitney’s musket parts had “interfaces” (having to do with fit and durability) and so do today’s interchangeable software components.

For software, the payoff can be

* Decreased time to market (it should be easier to use someone else’s ready solution than build your own)
* Increased reliability (widely used software should have its bugs ironed out already)
* Lower cost (the software supplier can amortize development cost across their customer base)
* Flexibility (if the component you want to buy is not terribly specialpurpose, it’s likely to be available from several sources, thus increasing your buying leverage)