2.10 Supplying a Transferable, Reusable Model 提供可转移、可重用的模型
===

The earlier in the life cycle that reuse is applied, the greater the benefit that can be achieved. While code reuse provides a benefit, reuse of architectures provides tremendous leverage for systems with similar requirements. Not only can code be reused, but so can the requirements that led to the architecture in the first place, as well as the experience and infrastructure gained in building the reused architecture. When architectural decisions can be reused across multiple systems, all of the early-decision consequences we just described are also transferred.

A software product line or family is a set of software systems that are all built using the same set of reusable assets. Chief among these assets is the architecture that was designed to handle the needs of the entire family. Product-line architects choose an architecture (or a family of closely related architectures) that will serve all envisioned members of the product line. The architecture defines what is fixed for all members of the product line and what is variable. Software product lines represent a powerful approach to multi-system development that is showing order-of-magnitude payoffs in time to market, cost, productivity, and product quality. The power of architecture lies at the heart of the paradigm. Similar to other capital investments, the architecture for a product line becomes a developing organization’s core asset. Software product lines are explained in Chapter 25.