2.2 Reasoning About and Managing Change
===

This point is a corollary to the previous point.

Modifiability—the ease with which changes can be made to a system—is a quality attribute (and hence covered by the arguments in the previous section), but it is such an important quality that we have awarded it its own spot in the List of Thirteen. The software development community is coming to grips with the fact that roughly 80 percent of a typical software system’s total cost occurs after initial deployment. A corollary of this statistic is that most systems that people work on are in this phase. Many programmers and software designers never get to work on new development; they work under the constraints of the existing architecture and the existing body of code. Virtually all software systems change over their lifetime, to accommodate new features, to adapt to new environments, to fix bugs, and so forth. But these changes are often fraught with difficulty.

Every architecture partitions possible changes into three categories: local, nonlocal, and architectural.

* A local change can be accomplished by modifying a single element. For example, adding a new business rule to a pricing logic module.
* A nonlocal change requires multiple element modifications but leaves the underlying architectural approach intact. For example, adding a new business rule to a pricing logic module, then adding new fields to the database that this new business rule requires, and then revealing the results of the rule in the user interface.
* An architectural change affects the fundamental ways in which the elements interact with each other and will probably require changes all over the system. For example, changing a system from client-server to peer-to-peer.

Obviously, local changes are the most desirable, and so an effective architecture is one in which the most common changes are local, and hence easy to make.

Deciding when changes are essential, determining which change paths have the least risk, assessing the consequences of proposed changes, and arbitrating sequences and priorities for requested changes all require broad insight into relationships, performance, and behaviors of system software elements. These activities are in the job description for an architect. Reasoning about the architecture and analyzing the architecture can provide the insight necessary to make decisions about anticipated changes.