2.3 Predicting System Qualities 预测系统质量
===

This point follows from the previous two. Architecture not only imbues systems with qualities, but it does so in a predictable way.

Were it not possible to tell that the appropriate architectural decisions have been made (i.e., if the system will exhibit its required quality attributes) without waiting until the system is developed and deployed, then choosing an architecture would be a hopeless task—randomly making architecture selections would perform as well as any other method. Fortunately, it is possible to make quality predictions about a system based solely on an evaluation of its architecture. If we know that certain kinds of architectural decisions lead to certain quality attributes in a system, then we can make those decisions and rightly expect to be rewarded with the associated quality attributes. After the fact, when we examine an architecture, we can look to see if those decisions have been made, and confidently predict that the architecture will exhibit the associated qualities.

This is no different from any mature engineering discipline, where design analysis is a standard part of the development process. The earlier you can find a problem in your design, the cheaper, easier, and less disruptive it will be to fix.

Even if you don't do the quantitative analytic modeling sometimes necessary to ensure that an architecture will deliver its prescribed benefits, this principle of evaluating decisions based on their quality attribute implications is invaluable for at least spotting potential trouble spots early.

The architecture modeling and analysis techniques described in Chapter 14, as well as the architecture evaluation techniques covered in Chapter 21, allow early insight into the software product qualities made possible by software architectures.