2.4 Enhancing Communication among Stakeholders
===

Software architecture represents a common abstraction of a system that most, if not all, of the system’s stakeholders can use as a basis for creating mutual understanding, negotiating, forming consensus, and communicating with each other. The architecture—or at least parts of it—is sufficiently abstract that most nontechnical people can understand it adequately, particularly with some coaching from the architect, and yet that abstraction can be refined into sufficiently rich technical specifications to guide implementation, integration, test, and deployment.

Each stakeholder of a software system—customer, user, project manager, coder, tester, and so on—is concerned with different characteristics of the system that are affected by its architecture. For example:

* The user is concerned that the system is fast, reliable, and available when needed.
* The customer is concerned that the architecture can be implemented on schedule and according to budget.
* The manager is worried (in addition to concerns about cost and schedule) that the architecture will allow teams to work largely independently, interacting in disciplined and controlled ways.
* The architect is worried about strategies to achieve all of those goals.

Architecture provides a common language in which different concerns can be expressed, negotiated, and resolved at a level that is intellectually manageable even for large, complex systems. Without such a language, it is difficult to understand large systems sufficiently to make the early decisions that influence both quality and usefulness. Architectural analysis, as we will see in Chapter 21, both depends on this level of communication and enhances it.

Section 3.5 covers stakeholders and their concerns in greater depth.

> **“What Happens When I Push This Button?” Architecture as a Vehicle for Stakeholder Communication**
>
> The project review droned on and on. The government-sponsored development was behind schedule and over budget and was large enough that these lapses were attracting congressional attention. And now the government was making up for past neglect by holding a marathon come-onecome-all review session. The contractor had recently undergone a buyout, which hadn’t helped matters. It was the afternoon of the second day, and the agenda called for the software architecture to be presented. The young architect—an apprentice to the chief architect for the system—was bravely explaining how the software architecture for the massive system would enable it to meet its very demanding real-time, distributed, high-reliability requirements. He had a solid presentation and a solid architecture to present. It was sound and sensible. But the audience—about 30 government representatives who had varying roles in the management and oversight of this sticky project—was tired. Some of them were even thinking that perhaps they should have gone into real estate instead of enduring another one of these marathon let’s-finally-get-it-right-this-time reviews.
>
> The viewgraph showed, in semiformal box-and-line notation, what the major software elements were in a runtime view of the system. The names were all acronyms, suggesting no semantic meaning without explanation, which the young architect gave. The lines showed data flow, message passing, and process synchronization. The elements were internally redundant, the architect was explaining. “In the event of a failure,” he began, using a laser pointer to denote one of the lines, “a restart mechanism triggers along this path when—”
>
> “What happens when the mode select button is pushed?” interrupted one of the audience members. He was a government attendee representing the user community for this system.
>
> “Beg your pardon?” asked the architect.
>
> “The mode select button,” he said. “What happens when you push it?”
>
> “Um, that triggers an event in the device driver, up here,” began the architect, laser-pointing. “It then reads the register and interprets the event code. If it’s mode select, well, then, it signals the blackboard, which in turns signals the objects that have subscribed to that event. . . . ”
>
> “No, I mean what does the system do,” interrupted the questioner. “Does it reset the displays? And what happens if this occurs during a system reconfiguration?”
>
> The architect looked a little surprised and flicked off the laser pointer. This was not an architectural question, but since he was an architect and therefore fluent in the requirements, he knew the answer. “If the command line is in setup mode, the displays will reset,” he said. “Otherwise an error message will be put on the control console, but the signal will be ignored.” He put the laser pointer back on. “Now, the restart mechanism that I was talking about—”
>
> “Well, I was just wondering,” said the users’ delegate. “Because I see from your chart that the display console is sending signal traffic to the target location module.”
>
> “What should happen?” asked another member of the audience, addressing the first questioner. “Do you really want the user to get mode data during its reconfiguring?” And for the next 45 minutes, the architect watched as the audience consumed his time slot by debating what the correct behavior of the system was supposed to be in various esoteric states.
>
> The debate was not architectural, but the architecture (and the graphical rendition of it) had sparked debate. It is natural to think of architecture as the basis for communication among some of the stakeholders besides the architects and developers: Managers, for example, use the architecture to create teams and allocate resources among them. But users? The architecture is invisible to users, after all; why should they latch on to it as a tool for understanding the system?
>
> The fact is that they do. In this case, the questioner had sat through two days of viewgraphs all about function, operation, user interface, and testing. But it was the first slide on architecture that—even though he was tired and wanted to go home—made him realize he didn’t understand something. Attendance at many architecture reviews has convinced me that seeing the system in a new way prods the mind and brings new questions to the surface. For users, architecture often serves as that new way, and the questions that a user poses will be behavioral in nature. In a memorable architecture evaluation exercise a few years ago, the user representatives were much more interested in what the system was going to do than in how it was going to do it, and naturally so. Up until that point, their only contact with the vendor had been through its marketers. The architect was the first legitimate expert on the system to whom they had access, and they didn’t hesitate to seize the moment.
>
> Of course, careful and thorough requirements specifications would ameliorate this situation, but for a variety of reasons they are not always created or available. In their absence, a specification of the architecture often serves to trigger questions and improve clarity. It is probably more prudent to recognize this reality than to resist it.
>
> Sometimes such an exercise will reveal unreasonable requirements, whose utility can then be revisited. A review of this type that emphasizes synergy between requirements and architecture would have let the young architect in our story off the hook by giving him a place in the overall review session to address that kind of information. And the user representative wouldn’t have felt like a fish out of water, asking his question at a clearly inappropriate moment.
>
> —PCC