2.5 Carrying Early Design Decisions
===

Software architecture is a manifestation of the earliest design decisions about a system, and these early bindings carry enormous weight with respect to the system’s remaining development, its deployment, and its maintenance life. It is also the earliest point at which these important design decisions affecting the system can be scrutinized.

Any design, in any discipline, can be viewed as a set of decisions. When painting a picture, an artist decides on the material for the canvas, on the media for recording—oil paint, watercolor, crayon—even before the picture is begun. Once the picture is begun, other decisions are immediately made: Where is the first line? What is its thickness? What is its shape? All of these early design decisions have a strong influence on the final appearance of the picture. Each decision constrains the many decisions that follow. Each decision, in isolation, might appear innocent enough, but the early ones in particular have disproportionate weight simply because they influence and constrain so much of what follows.

So it is with architecture design. An architecture design can also be viewed as a set of decisions. The early design decisions constrain the decisions that follow, and changing these decisions has enormous ramifications. Changing these early decisions will cause a ripple effect, in terms of the additional decisions that must now be changed. Yes, sometimes the architecture must be refactored or redesigned, but this is not a task we undertake lightly (because the “ripple” might turn into a tsunami).

What are these early design decisions embodied by software architecture? Consider:

* Will the system run on one processor or be distributed across multiple processors?
* Will the software be layered? If so, how many layers will there be? What will each one do?
* Will components communicate synchronously or asynchronously? Will they interact by transferring control or data or both?
* Will the system depend on specific features of the operating system or hardware?
* Will the information that flows through the system be encrypted or not?
* What operating system will we use?
* What communication protocol will we choose?

Imagine the nightmare of having to change any of these or a myriad other related decisions. Decisions like these begin to flesh out some of the structures of the architecture and their interactions. In Chapter 4, we describe seven categories of these early design decisions. In Chapters 5–11 we show the implications of these design decision categories on achieving quality attributes.