2.7 Influencing the Organizational Structure
===

Not only does architecture prescribe the structure of the system being developed, but that structure becomes engraved in the structure of the development project (and sometimes the structure of the entire organization). The normal method for dividing up the labor in a large project is to assign different groups different portions of the system to construct. This is called the work-breakdown structure of a system. Because the architecture includes the broadest decomposition of the system, it is typically used as the basis for the work-breakdown structure. The work-breakdown structure in turn dictates units of planning, scheduling, and budget; interteam communication channels; configuration control and file-system organization; integration and test plans and procedures; and even project minutiae such as how the project intranet is organized and who sits with whom at the company picnic. Teams communicate with each other in terms of the interface specifications for the major elements. The maintenance activity, when launched, will also reflect the software structure, with teams formed to maintain specific structural elements from the architecture: the database, the business rules, the user interface, the device drivers, and so forth.

A side effect of establishing the work-breakdown structure is to freeze some aspects of the software architecture. A group that is responsible for one of the subsystems will resist having its responsibilities distributed across other groups. If these responsibilities have been formalized in a contractual relationship, changing responsibilities could become expensive or even litigious.

Thus, once the architecture has been agreed on, it becomes very costly—for managerial and business reasons—to significantly modify it. This is one argument (among many) for carrying out extensive analysis before settling on the software architecture for a large system—because so much depends on it.