2.9 Improving Cost and Schedule Estimates
===

Cost and schedule estimates are important tools for the project manager both to acquire the necessary resources and to monitor progress on the project, to know if and when a project is in trouble. One of the duties of an architect is to help the project manager create cost and schedule estimates early in the project life cycle. Although top-down estimates are useful for setting goals and apportioning budgets, cost estimations that are based on a bottom-up understanding of the system’s pieces are typically more accurate than those that are based purely on top-down system knowledge.

As we have said, the organizational and work-breakdown structure of a project is almost always based on its architecture. Each team or individual responsible for a work item will be able to make more-accurate estimates for their piece than a project manager and will feel more ownership in making the estimates come true. But the best cost and schedule estimates will typically emerge from a consensus between the top-down estimates (created by the architect and project manager) and the bottom-up estimates (created by the developers). The discussion and negotiation that results from this process creates a far more accurate estimate than either approach by itself.

It helps if the requirements for a system have been reviewed and validated. The more up-front knowledge you have about the scope, the more accurate the cost and schedule estimates will be.

Chapter 22 delves into the use of architecture in project management.