2 Why Is Software Architecture Important?为什么说软件构架非常重要？
===

_Software architecture is the set of design decisions which, if made incorrectly, may cause your project to be cancelled._  
—Eoin Woods

If architecture is the answer, what was the question?

While Chapter 3 will cover the business importance of architecture to an enterprise, this chapter focuses on why architecture matters from a technical perspective. We will examine a baker’s dozen of the most important reasons.

1. An architecture will inhibit or enable a system’s driving quality attributes.
2. The decisions made in an architecture allow you to reason about and manage change as the system evolves.
3. The analysis of an architecture enables early prediction of a system’s qualities.
4. A documented architecture enhances communication among stakeholders.
5. The architecture is a carrier of the earliest and hence most fundamental, hardest-to-change design decisions.
6. An architecture defines a set of constraints on subsequent implementation.
7. The architecture dictates the structure of an organization, or vice versa.
8. An architecture can provide the basis for evolutionary prototyping.
9. An architecture is the key artifact that allows the architect and project manager to reason about cost and schedule.
10. An architecture can be created as a transferable, reusable model that forms the heart of a product line.
11. Architecture-based development focuses attention on the assembly of components, rather than simply on their creation.
12. By restricting design alternatives, architecture channels the creativity of developers, reducing design and system complexity.
13. An architecture can be the foundation for training a new team member.

Even if you already believe us that architecture is important and don’t need the point hammered thirteen more times, think of these thirteen points (which form the outline for this chapter) as thirteen useful ways to use architecture in a project.