3.2 Architecture in a Project Life-Cycle Context 项目生命周期语境中的架构
===

Software development processes are standard approaches for developing software systems. They impose a discipline on software engineers and, more important, teams of software engineers. They tell the members of the team what to do next. There are four dominant software development processes, which we describe in roughly the order in which they came to prominence:

1. _Waterfall_. For many years the Waterfall model dominated the field of software development. The Waterfall model organized the life cycle into a series of connected sequential activities, each with entry and exit conditions and a formalized relationship with its upstream and downstream neighbors. The process began with requirements specification, followed by design, then implementation, then integration, then testing, then installation, all followed by maintenance. Feedback paths from later to earlier steps allowed for the revision of artifacts (requirements documents, design documents, etc.) on an as-needed basis, based on the knowledge acquired in the later stage. For example, designers might push back against overly stringent requirements, which would then be reworked and flow back down. Testing that uncovered defects would trigger reimplementation (and maybe even redesign). And then the cycle continued.
2. _Iterative_. Over time the feedback paths of the Waterfall model became so pronounced that it became clear that it was better to think of software development as a series of short cycles through the steps—some requirements lead to some design, which can be implemented and tested while the next cycle’s worth of requirements are being captured and designed. These cycles are called iterations, in the sense of iterating toward the ultimate software solution for the given problem. Each iteration should deliver something working and useful. The trick here is to uncover early those requirements that have the most far-reaching effect on the design; the corresponding danger is to overlook requirements that, when discovered later, will capsize the design decisions made so far. An especially wellknown iterative process is called the Unified Process (originally named the Rational Unified Process, after Rational Software, which originated it). It defines four phases of each iteration: inception, elaboration, construction, and transition. A set of chosen use cases defines the goals for each iteration, and the iterations are ordered to address the greatest risks first.
3. _Agile_. The term “Agile software development” refers to a group of software development methodologies, the best known of which include Scrum, Extreme Programming, and Crystal Clear. These methodologies are all incremental and iterative. As such, one can consider some iterative ethodologies as Agile. What distinguishes Agile practices is early and frequent delivery of working software, close collaboration between developers and customers, self-organizing teams, and a focus on adaptation to changing circumstances (such as late-arriving requirements). All Agile methodologies focus on teamwork, adaptability, and close collaboration (both within the team and between team members and customers/end users). These methodologies typically eschew substantial up-front work, on the assumption that requirements always change, and they continue to change throughout the project’s life cycle. As such, it might seem that Agile methodologies and architecture cannot happily coexist. As we will show in Chapter 15, this is not so.
4. _Model-driven development_. Model-driven development is based on the idea that humans should not be writing code in programming languages, but they should be creating models of the domain, from which code is automatically generated. Humans create a platform-independent model (PIM), which is combined with a platform-definition model (PDM) to generate running code. In this way the PIM is a pure realization of the functional requirements while the PDM addresses platform specifics and quality attributes.

All of these processes include design among their obligations, and because architecture is a special kind of design, architecture finds a home in each one. Changing from one development process to another in the middle of a project requires the architect to save useful information from the old process and determine how to integrate it into the new process.

No matter what software development process or life-cycle model you’re using, there are a number of activities that are involved in creating a software architecture, using that architecture to realize a complete design, and then implementing or managing the evolution of a target system or application. The process you use will determine how often and when you revisit and elaborate each of these activities. These activities include:

1. Making a business case for the system
2. Understanding the architecturally significant requirements
3. Creating or selecting the architecture
4. Documenting and communicating the architecture
5. Analyzing or evaluating the architecture
6. Implementing and testing the system based on the architecture
7. Ensuring that the implementation conforms to the architecture

Each of these activities is covered in a chapter in Part III of this book, and described briefly below.

**Making a Business Case for the System**

A business case is, briefly, a justification of an organizational investment. It is a tool that helps you make business decisions by predicting how they will affect your organization. Initially, the decision will be a go/no-go for pursuing a new business opportunity or approach. After initiation, the business case is reviewed to assess the accuracy of initial estimates and then updated to examine new or alternative angles on the opportunity. By documenting the expected costs, benefits, and risks, the business case serves as a repository of the business and marketing data. In this role, management uses the business case to determine possible courses of action.

Knowing the business goals for the system—Chapter 16 will show you how to elicit and capture them in a systematic way—is also critical in the creation of a business case for a system.

Creating a business case is broader than simply assessing the market need for a system. It is an important step in shaping and constraining any future requirements. How much should the product cost? What is its targeted market? What is its targeted time to market and lifetime? Will it need to interface with other systems? Are there system limitations that it must work within?

These are all questions about which the system’s architects have specialized knowledge; they must contribute to the answers. These questions cannot be decided solely by an architect, but if an architect is not consulted in the creation of the business case, the organization may be unable to achieve its business goals. Typically, a business case is created prior to the initiation of a project, but it also may be revisited during the course of the project for the organization to determine whether to continue making investments in the project. If the circumstances assumed in the initial version of the business case change, the architect may be called upon to establish how the system will change to reflect the new set of circumstances.

**Understanding the Architecturally Significant Requirements**

There are a variety of techniques for eliciting requirements from the stakeholders. For example, object-oriented analysis uses use cases and scenarios to embody requirements. Safety-critical systems sometimes use more rigorous approaches, such as finite-state-machine models or formal specification languages. In Part II of this book, which covers quality attributes, we introduce a collection of quality attribute scenarios that aid in the brainstorming, discussion, and capture of quality attribute requirements for a system.

One fundamental decision with respect to the system being built is the extent to which it is a variation on other systems that have been constructed. Because it is a rare system these days that is not similar to other systems, requirements elicitation techniques involve understanding these prior systems’ characteristics. We discuss the architectural implications of software product lines in Chapter 25.

Another technique that helps us understand requirements is the creation of prototypes. Prototypes may help to model and explore desired behavior, design the user interface, or analyze resource utilization. This helps to make the system “real” in the eyes of its stakeholders and can quickly build support for the project and catalyze decisions on the system’s design and the design of its user interface.

**Creating or Selecting the Architecture**

In the landmark book The Mythical Man-Month, Fred Brooks argues forcefully and eloquently that conceptual integrity is the key to sound system design and that conceptual integrity can only be had by a small number of minds coming together to design the system’s architecture. We firmly believe this as well. Good architecture almost never results as an emergent phenomenon.

Chapters 5–12 and 17 will provide practical techniques that will aid you in creating an architecture to achieve its behavioral and quality requirements.

**Documenting and Communicating the Architecture**

For the architecture to be effective as the backbone of the project’s design, it must be communicated clearly and unambiguously to all of the stakeholders. Developers must understand the work assignments that the architecture requires of them, testers must understand the task structure that the architecture imposes on them, management must understand the scheduling implications it contains, and so forth.

Toward this end, the architecture’s documentation should be informative, unambiguous, and readable by many people with varied backgrounds. Architectural documentation should also be minimal and aimed at the stakeholders who will use it; we are no fans of documentation for documentation’s sake. We discuss the documentation of architectures and provide examples of good documentation practices in Chapter 18. We will also discuss keeping the architecture up to date when there is a change in something on which the architecture documentation depends.

**Analyzing or Evaluating the Architecture**

In any design process there will be multiple candidate designs considered. Some will be rejected immediately. Others will contend for primacy. Choosing among these competing designs in a rational way is one of the architect’s greatest challenges.

Evaluating an architecture for the qualities that it supports is essential to ensuring that the system constructed from that architecture satisfies its stakeholders’ needs. Analysis techniques to evaluate the quality attributes that an architecture imparts to a system have become much more widespread in the past decade. Scenario-based techniques provide one of the most general and effective approaches for evaluating an architecture. The most mature methodological approach is found in the Architecture Tradeoff Analysis Method (ATAM) of Chapter 21, while the economic implications of architectural decisions are explored in Chapter 23.

**Implementing and Testing the System Based on the Architecture**

If the architect designs and analyzes a beautiful, conceptually sound architecture which the implementers then ignore, what was the point? If architecture is important enough to devote the time and effort of your best minds to, then it is just as important to keep the developers faithful to the structures and interaction protocols constrained by the architecture. Having an explicit and well-communicated architecture is the first step toward ensuring architectural conformance. Having an environment or infrastructure that actively assists developers in creating and maintaining the architecture (as opposed to just the code) is better.

There are many reasons why developers might not be faithful to the architecture: It might not have been properly documented and disseminated. It might be too confusing. It might be that the architect has not built ground-level support for the architecture (particularly if it presents a different way of “doing business” than the developers are used to), and so the developers resist it. Or the developers may sincerely want to implement the architecture but, being human, they occasionally slip up. This is not to say that the architecture should not change, but it should not change purely on the basis of the whims of the developers, because they may not have the overall picture.

**Ensuring That the Implementation Conforms to the Architecture**

Finally, when an architecture is created and used, it goes into a maintenance phase. Vigilance is required to ensure that the actual architecture and its representation remain faithful to each other during this phase. And when they do get significantly out of sync, effort must be expended to either fix the implementation or update the architectural documentation.

Although work in this area is still relatively immature, it has been an area of intense activity in recent years. Chapter 20 will present the current state of recovering an architecture from an existing system and ensuring that it conforms to the specified architecture.
