3.3 Architecture in a Business Context
===

Architectures and systems are not constructed frivolously. They serve some business purposes, although as mentioned before, these purposes may change over time.

**Architectures and Business Goals**

Systems are created to satisfy the business goals of one or more organizations. Development organizations want to make a profit, or capture market, or stay in business, or help their customers do their jobs better, or keep their staff gainfully employed, or make their stockholders happy, or a little bit of each. Customers have their own goals for acquiring a system, usually involving some aspect of making their lives easier or more productive. Other organizations involved in a project’s life cycle, such as subcontractors or government regulatory agencies, have their own goals dealing with the system.

Architects need to understand who the vested organizations are and what their goals are. Many of these goals will have a profound influence on the architecture.

Many business goals will be manifested as quality attribute requirements. In fact, every quality attribute—such as a user-visible response time or platform flexibility or ironclad security or any of a dozen other needs—should originate from some higher purpose that can be described in terms of added value. If we ask, for example, “Why do you want this system to have a really fast response time?” we might hear that this will differentiate the product from its competition and let the developing organization capture market share.

Some business goals, however, will not show up in the form of requirements. We know of one software architect who was informed by his manager that the architecture should include a database. The architect was perplexed, because the requirements for the system really didn’t warrant a database and the architect’s design had nicely avoided putting one in, thereby simplifying the design and lowering the cost of the product. The architect was perplexed, that is, until the manager reminded the architect that the company’s database department was currently overstaffed and underworked. They needed something to do! The architect put in the database, and all was well. That kind of business goal—keeping staff gainfully employed—is not likely to show up in any requirements document, but if the architect had failed to meet it, the manager would have considered the architecture as unacceptable, just as the customer would have if it failed to provide a key piece of functionality.

Still other business goals have no effect on the architecture whatsoever. A business goal to lower costs might be realized by asking employees to work from home, or turn the office thermostats down in the winter, or using less paper in the printers. Chapter 16 will deal with uncovering business goals and the requirements they lead to.

```
graph LR;
  B[Business Goals];
  Q[Quality Attributes];
  N[Nonarchitectural Solutions];
  A[Architecture];
  B --> Q;
  B --> A;
  B -.->N;
  Q-->A;
```
# Figure 3.2 Some business goals may lead to quality attribute requirements (which lead to architectures), or lead directly to architectural decisions, or lead to nonarchitectural solutions.

Figure 3.2 illustrates the major points from the preceding discussion. In the figure, the arrows mean “leads to.” The solid arrows highlight the relationships of most interest to us.

**Architectures and the Development Organization**

A development organization contributes many of the business goals that influence an architecture. For example, if the organization has an abundance of experienced and idle programmers skilled in peer-to-peer communications, then a peer-to-peer architecture might be the approach supported by management. If not, it may well be rejected. This would support the business goal, perhaps left implicit, of not wanting to hire new staff or lay off existing staff, or not wanting to invest significantly in the retraining of existing staff.

More generally, an organization often has an investment in assets, such as existing architectures and the products based on them. The foundation of a development project may be that the proposed system is the next in a sequence of similar systems, and the cost estimates assume a high degree of asset reuse and a high degree of skill and productivity from the programmers.

Additionally, an organization may wish to make a long-term business investment in an infrastructure to pursue strategic goals and may view the proposed system as one means of financing and extending that infrastructure. For example, an organization may decide that it wants to develop a reputation for supporting solutions based on cloud computing or service-oriented architecture or high-performance real-time computing. This long-term goal would be supported, in part, by infrastructural investments that will affect the developing organization: a cloud-computing group needs to be hired or grown, infrastructure needs to be purchased, or perhaps training needs to be planned.

Finally, the organizational structure can shape the software architecture, and vice versa. Organizations are often organized around technology and application concepts: a database group, a networking group, a business rules team, a user-interface group. So the explicit identification of a distinct subsystem in the architecture will frequently lead to the creation of a group with the name of the subsystem. Furthermore, if the user-interface team frequently needs to communicate with the business rules team, these teams will need to either be co-located or they will need some regular means of communicating and coordinating.