3.4 Architecture in a Professional Context
===

What do architects do? How do you become an architect? In this section we talk about the many facets of being an architect that go beyond what you learned in a programming or software engineering course.

You probably know by now that architects need more than just technical skills. Architects need to explain to one stakeholder or another the chosen priorities of different properties, and why particular stakeholders are not having all of their expectations fulfilled. To be an effective architect, then, you will need diplomatic, negotiation, and communication skills.

You will perform many activities beyond directly producing an architecture. These activities, which we call duties, form the backbone of individual architecture competence. We surveyed the broad body of information aimed at architects (such as websites, courses, books, and position descriptions for architects), as well as practicing architects, and duties are but one aspect. Writers about architects also speak of skills and knowledge. For example, architects need the ability to communicate ideas clearly and need to have up-to-date knowledge about (for example) patterns, or database platforms, or web services standards.

Duties, skills, and knowledge form a triad on which architecture competence rests. You will need to be involved in supporting management and dealing with customers. You will need to manage a diverse workload and be able to switch contexts frequently. You will need to know business considerations. You will need to be a leader in the eyes of developers and management. In Chapter 24 we examine at length the architectural competence of organizations and people.

**Architects’ Background and Experience**

We are all products of our experiences, architects included. If you have had good results using a particular architectural approach, such as three-tier client-server or publish-subscribe, chances are that you will try that same approach on a new development effort. Conversely, if your experience with an approach was disastrous, you may be reluctant to try it again.

Architectural choices may also come from your education and training, exposure to successful architectural patterns, or exposure to systems that have worked particularly poorly or particularly well. You may also wish to experiment with an architectural pattern or technique learned from a book (such as this one) or a training course.

Why do we mention this? Because you (and your organization) must be aware of this influence, so that you can manage it to the best of your abilities. This may mean that you will critically examine proposed architectural solutions, to ensure that they are not simply the path of least resistance. It may mean that you will take training courses in interesting new technologies. It may mean that you will invest in exploratory projects, to “test the water” of a new technology. Each of these steps is a way to proactively manage your background and experience.