3.8 Summary
===

Architectures exist in four different contexts.

1. Technical. The technical context includes the achievement of quality attribute requirements. We spend Part II discussing how to do this. The technical context also includes the current technology. The cloud (discussed in Chapter 26) and mobile computing (discussed in Chapter 27) are important current technologies.
2. Project life cycle. Regardless of the software development methodology you use, you must make a business case for the system, understand the architecturally significant requirements, create or select the architecture, document and communicate the architecture, analyze or evaluate the architecture, implement and test the system based on the architecture, and ensure that the implementation conforms to the architecture.
3. Business. The system created from the architecture must satisfy the business goals of a wide variety of stakeholders, each of whom has different expectations for the system. The architecture is also influenced by and influences the structure of the development organization.
4. Professional. You must have certain skills and knowledge to be an architect, and there are certain duties that you must perform as an architect. These are influenced not only by coursework and reading but also by your experiences.

An architecture has some influences that lead to its creation, and its existence has an impact on the architect, the organization, and, potentially, the industry. We call this cycle the Architecture Influence Cycle.