3 The Many Context of Software Architecture一些软件架构的上下文
===

_People in London think of London as the center of the world, whereas New Yorkers think the world ends three miles outside of Manhattan._  
—Toby Young

In 1976, a New Yorker magazine cover featured a cartoon by Saul Steinberg showing a New Yorker’s view of the world. You’ve probably seen it; if not, you can easily find it online. Looking to the west from 9th Avenue in Manhattan, the illustration shows 10th Avenue, then the wide Hudson River, then a thin strip of completely nondescript land called “Jersey,” followed by a somewhat thicker strip of land representing the entire rest of the United States. The mostly empty United States has a cartoon mountain or two here and there and a few cities haphazardly placed “out there,” and is flanked by featureless “Canada” on the right and “Mexico” on the left. Beyond is the Pacific Ocean, only slightly wider than the Hudson, and beyond that lie tiny amorphous shapes for Japan and China and Russia, and that’s pretty much the world from a New Yorker’s perspective.

In a book about architecture, it is tempting to view architecture in the same way, as the most important piece of the software universe. And in some chapters, we unapologetically will do exactly that. But in this chapter we put software architecture in its place, showing how it supports and is informed by other critical forces and activities in the various contexts in which it plays a role.

These contexts, around which we structured this book, are as follows:

* Technical. What technical role does the software architecture play in the system or systems of which it’s a part?
* Project life cycle. How does a software architecture relate to the other phases of a software development life cycle?
* Business. How does the presence of a software architecture affect an organization’s business environment?
* Professional. What is the role of a software architect in an organization or a development project?

These contexts all play out throughout the book, but this chapter introduces each one. Although the contexts are unchanging, the specifics for your system may change over time. One challenge for the architect is to envision what in their context might change and to adopt mechanisms to protect the system and its development if the envisioned changes come to pass.