26.1 Basic Cloud Definitions 基本云定义
===

The essential characteristics of cloud computing (based, in part, on definitions provided by the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology, or NIST) are the following:

1. _On-demand self-service_. A resource consumer can unilaterally provision computing services, such as server time and network storage, as needed automatically without requiring human interaction with each service’s provider. This is sometimes called empowerment of end users of computing resources. Examples of resources include storage, processing, memory, network bandwidth, and virtual machines.
2. _Ubiquitous network access_. Cloud services and resources are available over the network and accessed through standard networking mechanisms that promote use by a heterogeneous collection of clients. For example, you can effectively run large applications on small platforms such as smart phones, laptops, and tablets by running the resource-intensive portion of those applications on the cloud. This capability is independent of location and device; all you need is a client and the Internet.
3. _Resource pooling_. The cloud provider’s computing resources are pooled. In this way they can efficiently serve multiple consumers. The provider can dynamically assign physical and virtual resources to consumers, according to their instantaneous demands.
4. _Location independence_. The location independence provided by ubiquitous network access is generally a good thing. It does, however, have one potential drawback. The consumer generally has less control over, or knowledge of, the location of the provided resources than in a traditional implementation. This can have drawbacks for data latency. The consumer may be able to ameliorate this drawback by specifying abstract location information (e.g., country, state, or data center).
5. _Rapid elasticity_. Due to resource pooling, it is easy for capabilities to be rapidly and elastically provisioned, in some cases automatically, to quickly scale out or in. To the consumer, the capabilities available for provisioning often appear to be virtually unlimited.
6. _Measured service_. Cloud systems automatically control and optimize resource use by leveraging a metering capability for the chosen service (e.g., storage, processing, bandwidth, and user accounts). Resource usage can be monitored, controlled, and reported so that consumers of the services are billed only for what they use.
7. _Multi-tenancy_. Multi-tenancy is the use of a single application that is responsible for supporting distinct classes or users. Each class or user has its own set of data and access rights, and different users or classes of users are kept distinct by the application.
