26.2 Service Models and Deployment Options
===

In this section we discuss more terminology and basic concepts. First we discuss the most important models for a consumer using the cloud.

Cloud Service Models

_Software as a Service (SaaS)_. The consumer in this case is an end user. The consumer uses applications that happen to be running on a cloud. The applications can be as varied as email, calendars, video streaming, and real-time collaboration. The consumer does not manage or control the underlying cloud infrastructure, including network, servers, operating systems, storage, or even individual application capabilities, with the possible exception of limited user-specific application configuration settings.

_Platform as a Service (PaaS)_. The consumer in this case is a developer or system administrator. The platform provides a variety of services that the consumer may choose to use. These services can include various database options, load-balancing options, availability options, and development environments. The consumer deploys applications onto the cloud infrastructure using programming languages and tools supported by the provider. The consumer does not manage or control the underlying cloud infrastructure, including network, servers, operating systems, or storage, but has control over the deployed applications and possibly application hosting environment configurations. Some levels of quality attributes (e.g., uptime, response time, security, fault correction time) may be specified by service-level agreements (SLAs).

_Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)_. The consumer in this case is a developer or system administrator. The capability provided to the consumer is to provision processing, storage, networks, and other fundamental computing resources where the consumer is able to deploy and run arbitrary software, which can include operating systems and applications. The consumer can, for example, choose to create an instance of a virtual computer and provision it with some specific version of Linux. The consumer does not manage or control the underlying cloud infrastructure but has control over operating systems, storage, deployed applications, and possibly limited control of select networking components (e.g., host firewalls). Again, SLAs are often used to specify key quality attributes.

# Deployment Models

The various deployment models for the cloud are differentiated by who owns and operates the cloud. It is possible that a cloud is owned by one party and operated by a different party, but we will ignore that distinction and assume that the owner of the cloud also operates the cloud.

There are two basic models and then two additional variants of these. The two basic models are private cloud and public cloud:

* _Private cloud_. The cloud infrastructure is owned solely by a single organization and operated solely for applications owned by that organization. The primary purpose of the organization is not the selling of cloud services.
* _Public cloud_. The cloud infrastructure is made available to the general public or a large industry group and is owned by an organization selling cloud services.

The two variants are community cloud and hybrid cloud:

* _Community cloud_. The cloud infrastructure is shared by several organizations and supports a specific community that has shared concerns (e.g., mission, security requirements, policy, and compliance considerations).
* _Hybrid cloud_. The cloud infrastructure is a composition of two or more clouds (private, community, or public) that remain unique entities. The consumer will deploy applications onto some combination of the constituent cloud. An example is an organization that utilizes a private cloud except for periods when spikes in load lead to servicing some requests from a public cloud. Such a technique is called “cloud bursting.”
