27.2 Changes to the Software Development Life Cycle 软件开发生命周期的变化
===

All our familiar software development life cycles—waterfall, Agile, iterative, or prototyping-based—are broken in an edge-dominant, crowdsourced world. These models all assume that requirements can be known; software is developed, tested, and released in planned increments; projects have dedicated finite resources; and management can “manage” these resources. None of these conditions is true in the Metropolis. Let us consider each aspect in turn:

* _Requirements can be known_. In edge-dominant systems, requirements emerge from its individuals, operating independently. Requirements are never knowable in any global sense and they will inevitably conflict, just as the requirements of a city’s inhabitants often conflict (some want better highways, some want more park land).
* Software is developed, tested, and released in planned increments. All existing software development models assume that systems evolve in an orderly way, through planned releases. An edge-dominant system, on the other hand, is constantly changing. It doesn’t make sense, for example, to talk about the “latest release” of Wikipedia. Resources are noncentralized and so such a system is never “stable.” One cannot conceive of its functionality in terms of “releases” any more than a city has a release; parts are being created, modified, and torn down at all times.
* _Projects have dedicated finite resources_. Edge-dominant projects are “staffed” by members who are not employed by the project. Such projects re subject to the whims of the members who are not required and cannot be compelled to contribute anything. However, successful projects tend to attract large numbers of contributors. Unlike traditional projects, which have finite resources, typically limited by budgetary constraints, there is no natural limit to the resources available to an edge-dominant project. And these large numbers tend to ameliorate the (unreliable) actions of any individual contributor.
* _Management can “manage” these resources_. In edge-dominant systems, the developers are often volunteers. They participate in decentralized production processes with no identifiable managers. Linus Torvalds, the creator of the Linux operating system, has noted that he has no authority to order anyone to do anything; he can only attempt to lead and persuade, in the hope that others will follow. Teams in this world are often diverse with differing, sometimes irreconcilable, views.

For edge-dominant systems, the old rules and tools of software development won’t work. Such projects are, to varying degrees, community driven and decentralized with little overall control, as is the case with the major social networking communities (e.g., Twitter, Google+, Facebook), and open content systems (e.g., Wikipedia, YouTube), especially coupled with open source software development.
