27.7 Discussion Questions 问题讨论
===

1. Draw the architecture influence cycle for Web 2.0 software systems in general, and for one of its flagship examples (such as Twitter or Facebook).
2. Create a complete pattern description for the core/periphery pattern, modeled on those in Chapter 13.
3. How might the role of architecture documentation be different for an edge-dominant system?
4. Which architectural views would you expect to be the most important to document for a system built under the Metropolis model?
5. How would you establish the architecturally significant requirements for the core? Would you use a Quality Attribute Workshop, or would you use something less structured and more open? Why?
6. Metropolis systems are frequently open source. Some organizations that might want to contribute to or build on top of such a system may balk at releasing all of their code to the public. What architectural means might you employ to address this situation?
7. Choose your favorite crowdsourced system. Write a testability scenario for this system, and choose a set of testability tactics that you would use for it.
8. Constructing and releasing an application on a platform such as the iPhone or the Android requires the developer to adhere to certain specifications and to pass through certain hoops. Redraw Figure 27.2 to reflect the Apple iPhone ecosystem and the Android ecosystem.
9. Find a study that discusses the motivation of Wikipedia contributors. Find another study that discusses the motivation of open source developers. Compare the results of these two studies.
