24.2 Competence of a Software Architecture Organization 软件架构组织的能力
===

Organizations by their practices and structure can help or hinder architects in performing their duties. For example, if an organization has a career path for architects, that will motivate employees to become architects. If an organization has a standing architecture review board, then the project architect will know how and with whom to schedule a review. Lack of these items will mean that an architect has to fight battles with the organization or determine how to carry out a review without internal guidance. It makes sense, therefore, to ask whether a particular organization is architecturally competent and to develop instruments whose goal is measuring the architectural competence of an organization. The architectural competence of organizations is the topic of this section.

Activities Carried Out by a Competent Organization

Organizations have duties, skills, and knowledge for architecture as well. For example, adequately funding the architecture effort is an organizational duty, as is effectively using the available architecture workforce (by appropriate teaming, and so on). These are organizational duties because they are outside the control of individual architects. An organization-level skill might be effective knowledge management or human resource management as applied to architects. An example of organizational knowledge is the composition of an architecture-based life-cycle model that software projects may employ.

Here are some things—duties—that an organization can perform to help improve the success of its architecture efforts:

* Hire talented architects.
* Establish a career track for architects.
* Make the position of architect highly regarded through visibility, reward, and prestige.
* Establish a clear statement of responsibilities and authority for architects.
* Establish a mentoring program for architects.
* Establish an architecture training and education program.
* Establish an architect certification program.
* Have architects receive external architect certifications.
* Measure architects’ performance.
* Establish a forum for architects to communicate and share information and experience.
* Establish a repository of reusable architectures and architecture-based artifacts.
* Develop reusable reference architectures.
* Establish organization-wide architecture practices.
* Establish an architecture review board.
* Measure the quality of architectures produced.
* Provide a centralized resource to analyze and help with architecture tools.
* Hold an organization-wide architecture conference.
* Have architects join professional organizations.
* Bring in outside expert consultants on architecture.
* Include architecture milestones in project plans.
* Have architects provide input into product definition.
* Have architects advise on the development team structure.
* Give architects influence throughout the entire project life cycle.
* Reward or penalize architects based on project success or failure.

Assessment Goals

The activities enumerated above can be assessed. What are the potential goals from an assessment of an organization’s architecture competence? There are at least four sets of reasons for assessing organizational architectural competence:

1. There are goals relevant to any business that wishes to improve their architectural competence. Businesses regularly assess their own performance in a variety of means—technical, fiscal, operational (for example, consider the widespread use of multi-criteria techniques such as the Balanced Scorecard or Business/IT Alignment in industry)—for a variety of reasons. These include determining whether they are meeting industry norms and gauging their progress over time in meeting organizational goals.
2. There are goals relevant to an acquisition organization. For example, an organization can use an assessment of architecture competence to assess a contractor in much the same way that contractors are scrutinized with respect to their CMMI level. Or an organization might use an assessment of architecture competence to aid in deciding among competing bids from contractors. All other things being equal, an acquiring organization would prefer a contractor with a higher level of architectural competence because this typically means fewer downstream problems and rework. An acquisition organization might assess the contractors directly, or hire a third party to do the assessment.
3. There are goals relevant to service organizations: such organizations might be motivated to maintain, measure, and advertise their architectural competence as a means of attracting and retaining customers. In such a case they would typically rely on outside organizations to assess their level of competence in an objective fashion.
4. Finally, there are goals that are relevant to product builders: these organizations would be motivated to assess, monitor (and, over time, increase) their level of architectural competence as it would (1) aid in advertising the quality of their products and (2) aid in their internal productivity and predictability. In fact, in these ways their motivations are aligned with those of service organizations.

Assessing an Organization’s Competence

In addition to duties, skills, and knowledge, there are other models of individual and organizational competence that are helpful in building an instrument for assessing an organization’s competence. They are the following:

* The _Human Performance Technology model_, which measures the value of an individual or department’s output and the cost of producing that output. It holds that competent people produce the most value for every organizational dollar spent.
* The _Organizational Coordination model_, which measures how teams in multiple sites developing a single product or related set of products cooperate to produce a functioning product. An organization that is architecturally competent will have more effective and efficient coordination mechanisms than an organization that is not architecturally competent.
* The _Organizational Learning model_, which measures how well an organization’s learning processes transform experience into knowledge, moderated by context.

We have created a framework for organizational architecture competence that forms the foundation for a competence assessment procedure. A small team of trained assessors can use the framework to conduct interviews (with architects, developers, and technical and organizational managers), examine current practices, read documents and evidentiary artifacts (such as organizational standards), and investigate architecture-based successes and failures in the recent past. They can use their findings to identify systemic trouble spots and recommend improvement strategies.

Table 24.5 shows the framework. For convenience, it is divided into practice areas that relate to software and system engineering, technical management (which is by and large the management of single projects or small numbers of related projects), and organizational management (which is management at a scope more broad than that of projects).

The framework is populated by questions inspired by the four models of competence that we previously described. Each question has a set of answers that we might expect to see in a competent organization. For example, a question associated with the practice area “Hire talented architects” deals with how a candidate architect’s experience and capabilities are assessed. Expected answers might include having the architect take a test, requiring that candidates possess an architecture certification, or examining previous architectures designed by the candidate. (Our expected answers grow as we visit more and more organizations. It’s a pleasant surprise when we find an organization carrying out a practice area in a clever way that we hadn’t thought of.)

**Questions based on the duties, Skills, and Knowledge Model.** Our assessment framework contains dozens of questions related to duties, skills, and knowledge. The questions are posed in terms of the organization: The questions ask how the organization ensures that the architectural duties are carried out in a competent manner, and how the organization measures and nurtures its architects’ skills and knowledge. Here is a small set of example questions based on the Duties, Skills, and Knowledge model (chosen from among the dozens that populate our assessment framework) that we use in an architecture competence assessment exercise with an organization.

TABLE 24.5 Framework for Organizational Architecture Competence

. | .
---|---
Software Engineering Practice Areas | Quality Attribute Elicitation Practices
. | Tools and Technology Selection
. | Modeling and Prototyping Practices
. | Architecture Design Practices
. | Architecture Description Practices
. | Architecture Evaluation Practices
. | System Implementation Practices <br><li>Software design practices (design conforms to architecture) <br><li>Software coding practices (code conforms to design and architecture)
. | Software Verification Practices <br><li>Proving properties of the software <br><li>Software testing
. | Architecture Reconstruction Practices
Technical Management Practice Areas | Business or Mission Goals Practices <br><li>Setting goals <br><li>Measuring achievement of organization’s goals <br><li>Performance-based compensation
. | Product or System Definition Practices <br><li>Setting functional requirements
. | Allocating Resources <br><li>Setting architect’s workload and schedule <br><li>Funding stakeholder involvement
. | Project Management Practices <br><li>Project plan structure aligned with architecture structure <br><li>Adequate time planned for architecture evaluation
. | Process Discipline Practices <br><li>Establish organization-wide architecture practices <br><li>Process monitoring and improvement practices <br><li>Reuse practices
. | Collaboration with Manager Practices <br><li>Architects advise managers <br><li>Architects support managers
Organizational Management Practice Areas | Hire Talented Architects
. | Establish a Career Track for Architects <br><li>Leadership roles for architects <br><li>Succession planning
. | Professional Development Practices <br><li>Ongoing training <br><li>Creating and sustaining an internal community of architects <br><li>Supporting participation in external communities
. | Organizational Planning Practices
. | Technology Planning and Forecasting Practices

Duty: Creating an Architecture

Question: How do you create an architecture?

* How do you ensure that the architecture is aligned with the business goals?
* What is the input into the architecture creation process? What inputs are provided to the architect?
* How does the architect validate the information provided? What does the architect do in case the input is insufficient or inadequate?

Duty: Architecture Evaluation and Analysis

Question: How do you evaluate and analyze an architecture?

* Are evaluations part of the normal software development life cycle or are they done when problems are encountered?
* Is the evaluation incremental or “big bang”? How is the timing determined?
* Does the evaluation include an explicit activity relating architecture to business goals?
* What are the inputs to the evaluation? How are they validated?
* What are the outputs from an evaluation? How are the outputs of the evaluation utilized? Are the outputs differentiated according to impact or importance? How are the outputs validated? Who is communicated what outputs?

Knowledge: Architecture Concepts

Question: How does your organization ensure that its architects have adequate architectural knowledge?

* How are architects trained in general knowledge of architecture?
* How do architects learn about architectural frameworks, patterns, tactics, standards, documentation notations, and architecture description languages?
* How do architects learn about new or emerging architectural technologies (e.g., multi-core processors)?
* How do architects learn about analysis and evaluation techniques and methods?
* How do architects learn quality attribute-specific knowledge, such as techniques for analyzing and managing availability, performance, modifiability, and security?
* How are architects tested to ensure that their level of knowledge is adequate, and remains adequate, for the tasks that they face?

**Questions Based on the Organizational Coordination Model**. Questions based on the Organizational Coordination model focus on how the organization establishes its teams and what support it provides for those teams to coordinate effectively. Here are a couple of example questions:

Question: How is the architecture designed with distribution of work to teams in mind?

* How available or broadly shared is the architecture to various teams?
* How do you manage the evolution of architecture during development?
* Is the work assigned to the teams before or after the architecture is defined, and with due consideration of the architectural structure?

Question: Are the aspects of the architecture that will require a lot of interteam coordination supported by the organization’s coordination/communication infrastructure?

* Do you co-locate teams with high coordination? Or at least put them in the same time zone?
* Must all coordination among teams go through the architecture team?

Questions Based on the Human Performance Technology Model.

The Human Performance Technology questions deal with the value and cost of the organization’s architectural activities. Here are examples of questions based on the Human Performance Technology model:

Question: Do you track how much the architecture effort costs, and how it impacts overall project cost and schedule?

* How do you track the end of architecture activities?
* How do you track the impact of architecture activities?

   Question: Do you track the value or benefits of the architecture?

* How do you measure stakeholder satisfaction?
* How do you measure quality?

Questions based on the Organizational learning Model. Finally, a set of example questions, based on the Organizational Learning model, which deal with how the organization systematically internalizes knowledge to its advantage:

Question: How do you capture and share experiences, lessons learned, technological decisions, techniques and methods, and knowledge about available tooling?

* Do you use any knowledge management tools?
* Is capture and use of architectural knowledge embedded in your processes?
* Where is the information about “who knows what” captured and how is this information maintained?
* How complete and up to date is your architecture documentation? How widely disseminated is it?

Performing an Assessment

Our organizational competence assessment is carried out using a team of three to four assessors. The exercise is set up by establishing the scope of the review: Are we assessing the entire company? One of its divisions? Or perhaps a single important project?

After we establish the scope, we identify the groups we wish to interview. Of course, we’ll want to interview the architecture team(s) within the scope. From there we identify groups both upstream and downstream of the architects. Upstream are groups that manage the architects or provide organization-wide architecture training. Downstream, we interview the “consumers” of the architectures, such as developers, integrators, testers, and maintainers. We interview small groups, making sure that no members of an interview group have reporting relationships with each other.

We try hard to establish an informal atmosphere in the group interviews, to avoid inhibiting the participants. The tone is conversational, not inquisitional. We begin each interview by reminding the participants of the purpose of the exercise, and to assure them that nothing they say will be quoted to anyone outside the group in any way that could identify them.

For each group, we have planned which parts of the framework we wish to discuss with that group. We won’t ask testers, for example, questions intended for managers, and vice versa. We use the questions as a guide for the conversation, but not a rigid script. Whenever we pose a question in the assessment instrument, there are a number of meta-questions that automatically accompany it. For example:

* What evidence could you show us to support your answer? Supporting evidence might include a software development plan that lays out the role of architecture in a project, an organization’s architecture-based training curriculum, or many other kinds of documentation.
* How sustainable is your answer over time, over different systems, and across different architects? For example, we might ask how an answer might change if a different architect came on board the project.

The outcome of an assessment is organized by the practice areas of the framework. For each practice, we assign one of three values that correspond to “you’re doing this well,” “you could be doing this better (and experiencing more benefit),” and “this is an area of high risk.” Graphically, we show this as green light, yellow light, red light. We have found that this simple metric provides organizations with enough granularity to turn their attention to problem areas, which is the whole point of the assessment. We do not give an overall rating. Thus, we closely mirror the “continuous representation” option of maturity models such as CMMI, in which the result is a vector rather than a scalar.

We present the findings in a written report and a slide presentation. In both, we describe and justify each finding, based on what we were told in the interviews and/or read in provided documents.
