24.4 For Further Reading 进一步阅读
===

The four models that underlie the assessment framework presented here are described in more detail in the Technical Note “Models for Evaluating and Improving Architecture Competence” [Bass 08]. These models are the following:

* _Duties, Skills, and Knowledge (DSK) model of competence_. This model is predicated on the belief that architects and architecture-producing organizations are useful sources for understanding the tasks necessary to the job of architecting. To assemble a comprehensive set of duties, skills, and knowledge for architects, we surveyed approximately 200 sources of information targeted to professional architects—books, websites, blogs, position descriptions, and more. The results of this survey can be found in [Clements 07].
* _Human Performance model of competence_. This model is based on the human performance engineering work of Thomas Gilbert [Gilbert 07]. This model is predicated on the belief that competent individuals in any profession are the ones who produce the most valuable results at a reasonable cost. Using this model will involve figuring out how to measure the value and cost of the outputs of architecture efforts, finding areas where that ratio can be improved, and crafting improvement strategies based on environmental and behavioral factors.
* _Organizational Coordination model of competence_. The focus of this model is on creating an interteam coordination model for teams developing a single product or a closely related set of products. The architecture for the product induces a requirement for teams to coordinate during the realization or refinement of architectural decisions. The organizational structure, practices, and tool environment of the teams allow for particular types of coordination with a particular interteam communication bandwidth. The coordination model of competence compares the requirements for coordination that the architecture induces with the bandwidth for coordination supported by the organizational structure, practices, and tool environment [Cataldo 07].
* Organizational Learning model of competence. This model is based on the concept that organizations, and not just individuals, can learn. Organizational learning is a change in the organization that occurs as a function of experience. This change can occur in the organization’s cognitions or knowledge (e.g., as presented by Fiol and Lyles [Fiol 85]), its routines or practices (e.g., as demonstrated by Levitt and March [Levitt 88]), or its performance (e.g., as presented by Dutton and Thomas [Dutton 84]). Although individuals are the medium through which organizational learning generally occurs, learning by individuals within the organization does not necessarily imply that organizational learning has occurred. For learning to be organizational, it has to have a supra-individual component [Levitt 88]. There are three approaches to measure organizational learning: (1) measure knowledge directly through questionnaires, interviews, and verbal protocols; (2) treat changes in routines and practices as indicators of changes in knowledge; or (3) view changes in organizational performance indicators associated with experience as reflecting changes in knowledge [Argote 07].

The Open Group offers a certification program for qualifying the skills, knowledge, and experience of IT, business, and enterprise architects, which is related to measuring and certifying an individual architect’s competence. Visit opengroup.org for details. The International Association of Software Architects (IASA) offers a similar certification; see iasahome.org.

Dana Bredemeyer and Ruth Malan have written many articles on the role of the software architect (www.bredemeyer.com/who.htm), including their duties and skills [Bredemeyer 11] (www.bredemeyer.com/Architect/ArchitectSkillsLinks.htm). They have their own competence framework as well as a skills development program.

The U.K. Chapter of the International Council on Systems Engineering (IN-COSE) maintains a “Core Competencies Framework” for systems engineers that includes a “Basic Skills and Behaviours” section listing “the usual common attributes required by any professional engineer” [INCOSE 05]. The list includes coaching, communication, negotiation and influencing, and “team working.”

The classic work on the Balanced Scorecard was created by Kaplan and Norton [Kaplan 92] and the classic work on Business/IT Alignment was originally created by Luftman [Luftman 00], although this has been updated to explicitly consider the role of architecture in alignment [Chen 10].

Boehm, Valerdi, and Honour [Boehm 07] provide one of the few empirical studies of systems engineering and how an investment in “better” engineering pays off (or doesn’t) in the future.
