25.11 Discussion Questions 问题讨论
===

1. Variability is achieved by adding variation mechanisms to a system. Variation mechanisms include inheritance, component substitution, plug-ins, templates, parameters (including text preprocessors), generators, aspects, runtime conditionals, and a configurator tool. Because variability can be seen as a kind of modifiability, see if you can map each of these variation mechanisms to one or more modifiability tactics given in Chapter 7.
2. Suppose a company builds two similar systems using a large set of common assets, including an architecture. Which of the following would you say constitutes a product line?
* Sharing only an architecture but no elements.
* Sharing only a single element.
* Sharing the same operating system and programming language runtime libraries.
* Sharing the same team of developers.

Defend your answer.

3. Pick a type of system you’re familiar with—for example, an automobile or a smartphone. Think of three instances of that kind of system. Make a list of all of the things the three instances have in common. Now make a list of all of the things that distinguish the three instances from each other (that is, their variation points). If automobiles turn out to be too complex, start with a simpler kind of “system,” such as an electric light.
4. Write some concrete scenarios to express the variability you identified in the previous question.
5. Do the list of variation mechanisms in this chapter constitute tactics for variability? Discuss.
6. In many software product lines, products differ by the quality attributes they exhibit. For instance, a company might sell a cheap, low-security version of its product alongside a more expensive, high-security version of the same product. Which variation mechanisms might you choose to achieve this kind of variability?
