25.4 The Quality Attribute of Variability 可变性的质量属性
===

Scoping decisions, which tell the product line architect what kinds of systems are “in” and what kinds of systems are “out” of the product line, lead to the introduction of variability in the core assets. In fact, the quality attribute of variability is most closely associated with product lines. Some may feature high-performance products, or high-security products, or high-availability products, but all product lines feature variability aimed at satisfying the commonalities and variations identified by the product line’s scope.

We introduced variability in Chapter 12. There we said that variability is a special form of modifiability, pertaining to the ability of a core asset to adapt to usages in the different product contexts that are within the product line scope. The goal of variability in a software product line is to make it easy to build and maintain products in the product line over time.

Table 25.1 gives the general scenario for variability. The source is some actor in the product line organization who identifies a need for variation; this actor is probably someone involved in setting the product line’s scope, such as a marketer.

Identifying variation is a constant, iterative process in the life of a software product line. Because of the many different ways a product can vary, particular variants can be identified at virtually any time during the development process. Some variations are identified during product line requirement elicitations; others, during architecture design; and still others, during implementation. Variations may also be identified during implementation of the second (and subsequent) products as well.

Product line architectures feature variability as an important quality attribute. They achieve this by incorporation of variation mechanisms, which we will discuss in more detail shortly.
